
Riveters All-Star Kendall Coyne Schofield knows it is up to the NWHL and CWHL players to push for one league.
At the finale of the USA versus Canada rivalry series last month in Detroit, Kendall Coyne Schofield stood in front of a cluster of reporters. As often happens at such events, Coyne Schofield was asked what's next for women's hockey. "We need one league," the 26-year-old forward said sternly. "We know it's up to us as players to push for it, and we know the NHL will be right alongside us along the way."
The one league movement has existed since the U.S.-based NWHL debuted four years ago, branded as the first women's professional league to pay its players. The Canadian-based CWHL has been around since 2007. In 2017, the CWHL began paying its players a stipend as well. However, across 11 teams in two leagues, the top talent is too dispersed, and the money isn't significant enough to constitute a living wage. That forces a majority of the women to keep their jobs as accountants, teachers, engineers and sales reps while somehow squeezing in the time (and scrounging the resources) to remain elite athletes.
One solution would be for the NHL to swoop in and form a WNHL, pooling its deep pockets and infrastructure to support one league with a stronger foundation. Of course, it's not as easy as that. Here's a glance at the landscape as it stands now.
Note: The NWHL declined an interview request for NWHL commissioner Dani Rylan, with a league spokesperson saying: "For us to discuss our collective goals for professional women's hockey in North America at this vitally important time would be counterproductive to the process. We agree with the players and observers who have said that it's time for action, not talk."



Rivalry Series a boost for women's hockey

NWHL and CWHL still no closer to merger

What does the NHL have to say about it?
NHL commissioner Gary Bettman has gone on the record several times to say that he doesn't want to intervene with either league as long as they both exist in their current states. In October, Bettman told the Associated Press that he didn't want "to look like a bully" and push the existing leagues out of business but he added that he didn't want to take over either league because "we don't believe in their models." Privately, sources told ESPN that the NHL would be interested in helping run a women's league but does not plan to do anything meaningful until the leagues have merged -- or both folded altogether.
What's the NHL league office's level of involvement now?
Sources said the NHL gives a financial contribution to both leagues -- the exact same amount to each -- just as it does to other hockey organizations from time to time. (For example, in 2017, the NHL quietly gave USA Hockey $25,000 per player to help fund a four-year agreement with the women's national team and end a stalemate).
An industry source said the NHL contribution to both leagues is "less than six figures."
Dani Rylan is the commissioner and founder of the NWHL. The league operates all of its teams, except the Buffalo Beauts.
Who runs the leagues now?
Jayna Hefford, a recent Hockey Hall of Fame inductee, is serving as the interim commissioner of the CWHL. (She is a CWHL alumnus, and the league's most outstanding player award is named in her honor). The CWHL is not-for-profit, an important distinction from the NWHL. It has an 11-member board of directors that meets monthly. According to Hefford, the board of directors approves a budget at the beginning of the season, and after that, there isn't much flexibility.
The CWHL owns five of its six teams. Those operate on their own. The GMs hire the coaches and sign players, but the teams are centrally funded. The team in Shenzhen is not owned by the CWHL. It pays its own operating expenses, including staff and player salaries.
Rylan, a former Northeastern University player, is the commissioner and founder of the NWHL. The league operates all of its teams, except the Buffalo Beauts, which are privately owned by Pegula Sports & Entertainment (Terry and Kim Pegula are the owners of the NHL's Buffalo Sabres and the NFL's Buffalo Bills). For the other four teams, the league hires and oversees employees, including coaches, trainers, equipment staffers and business managers. It also employs game-day staff, including broadcasters.
The NWHL says it has eight staffers at its league office.
Do the leagues communicate?
Hefford, Rylan and Bettman have never sat in the same room to chat about shared goals. Hefford told the ESPN on Ice Podcast that she has "had ongoing conversations" with Bettman, "and the one thing I can say about Gary is, everything he's said publicly is what he's said privately."
On her communication with Rylan, Hefford said: "I've spoken to Dani a few times. We continue to discuss options and look at the future for the women's game, but there are some challenges in terms of our models and different things. It's an ongoing relationship where we try to figure out the best route for the women's game, but in the midst of that, we have so much on our plate, just operating our own league. So it's doing a little bit of balancing both. During the season, our eyes [are] on our leagues."
Do the players have representation?
The NWHL has a player association, but it is not unionized and does not have a CBA. Until this past season, NWHL players did not have legal representation. Christina Simanca-Proctor is a real estate attorney in New York City. When she read an online article about the NWHL players' pay last year, she reached out to the NWHLPA. Simanca-Proctor and Valdi Licul, who specializes in employment law, now offer the NWHLPA counsel.
At the start of this season, there were three priorities for the NWHLPA. It wanted to designate players as employees again (they were employees the first season, and then the designation switched to independent contractors). It wanted salary increases for every player. And it wanted increased benefits, such as per diem.
The NWHL players are once again classified as employees. They did not get a salary increase for every player. The per diem rates increased from $10 to $20 for road games, which is a big jump but still much less than the recognized federal standard of $51.
The CWHL, similarly, has a players association. The NHLPA has had a partnership with the CWHL for the past two seasons (the agreements are on a year-by-year basis). The NHLPA provides financial support for the league; it puts on the CWHL Clarkson Cup Award Show and is the presenting sponsor of the Jayna Hefford Award. The award show is a well-received and much-appreciated event for the players.
The NHLPA says it is not involved in CWHL player contracts; their staff is available to answer any questions players have, though nothing specific is made available. The NHLPA says it will answer questions from players in either league -- the CWHL or NWHL -- though it does not represent them.
The CWHL owns five of its six teams, including the defending champion Markam Thunder. The GMs hire the coaches and sign players, but the teams are centrally funded.
What do the players get paid?
Both leagues have a salary cap of $100,000. The lowest-paid player in the NWHL this season is making $2,500. The range for CWHL players is $2,000 to $10,000, CAD.
"We don't even often refer to it as a salary because in my mind, it's not really necessarily [a] big enough number to be called a salary," Hefford said. "So I really look at it like a stipend for players to reimburse expenses on their end."
The team in Shenzhen is an exception, however, as it operates on its own and gets funding from the ownership group RDS. Players get housing and jobs working clinics and helping hockey grow in China. The KRS Vanke Rays players can make as much as six figures.
The NWHL says that over five years, it has paid more than $2.5 million to players. Players get 15 percent of sales from jerseys with their names on them. Salaries were much higher in the first season (and publicly available on the league's website), with players making between $10,000 and $25,000. In 2016, the NWHL slashed salaries by 50 percent midseason in an effort to stay "financially viable," according to Rylan at the time.
"From a player's perspective, we had our best financial year in year one. That was the most professional pay structure we had," said Anya Battaglino, the president of the NWHLPA. "A $25,000 contract feels like $50,000 in the six months you're playing. In an entry level job, that's crushing it. So our best pay was in year one. Then in year two, we had a salary cut, and it was our most challenging year yet. Year three we improved. Then in year four, our contracts had gotten stronger, we had people like Christina involved, and we got back to a salary-cap structure. So if you could take it as a blip in the radar in year two, we've gotten better year over year since then. The pay is half of what it was in year one, a quarter in some cases. So if I'm giving you a stock report, it's still red. But it's better than being a downward trajectory. We are absolutely progressing forward and getting better year over year."
Do the leagues get any other assistance?
USA Hockey does not give the NWHL any financial assistance. There is a partnership for officials -- USA Hockey designates officials for NWHL games, which helps them evaluate them, but the NWHL pays for the officials on the ice -- and USA Hockey has people on the league's Player Safety Committee.
Individual NHL teams have partnered with clubs across the two leagues, including the Montreal Canadiens, Toronto Maple Leafs, Calgary Flames, Ottawa Senators, Buffalo Sabres, Boston Bruins, New Jersey Devils and Minnesota Wild. Regarding the CWHL's NHL deals, Hefford said: "The NHL partnerships all vary, but there's a base consistency. There's a lot of things that includes, from resources to financial assistance." It can also manifest with league events being hosted at an NHL venue (such as the Clarkson Cup at Ottawa's Canadian Tire Centre last year, for example).
In the NWHL, the Wild partner with the Whitecaps, the Devils with the Riveters and the Bruins with the Pride. However, there isn't much clarity -- even to the players -- relating to the substance of these relationships. "We do know these relationships have not produced any pay or benefit increases for players or the procurement of better equipment or increased services, such as food services," Simanca-Proctor said.
Often, players can procure ice time at NHL facilities -- but usually when they are not otherwise being used. Some NHL teams sometimes help promote NWHL games or players on social media. Others lend some marketing help. And some have stepped up when needed. For example, when the Riveters needed help with goaltending this season, the Devils offered more ice time so the team could hire a goalie consultant and work with the goalie on the ice for a few sessions.
The Beauts, however, have seen a significant benefit from their Buffalo Sabres partnership because they are all owned under the Pegula Sports & Entertainment umbrella. This means Beauts players get more access to Sabres facilities as well as access to skills ice (which other teams do not have). Opposing players have noticed that the Beauts have much nicer and newer gear than other teams. Buffalo players also get catered meals before games, and some Beauts players are helped with housing.
Beauts goalie Shannon Szabados is the only senior national Team Canada player in the NWHL this season. She told ESPN on Ice this week that Buffalo is "one of the best, if not probably the best run professional woman's hockey team in the entire world."
Szabados went on: "We have ice every single day, sometimes twice a day. It's always open and available. Same with the gym and access to facilities, and it really is just top-notch. A lot of our staff crosses over, so our PR staff, you see a lot of videos of the Sabres guys wearing Beauts stuff. They posted a video the other day before our playoff game of Carter Hutton and some of the Sabres and other players wishing us good luck. It's a really unique relationship."
While other players are happy for their colleagues, they would like the disparity gap to close.
The 2019 NWHL All-Star Game in Nashville drew 6,200, the largest crowd ever for a pro women's hockey game in the U.S.
How healthy are the leagues?
This is a tricky question to answer. The CWHL was reluctant to pay players until it was sure it had enough money to be sustainable. That happened in 2017, coinciding with two teams in China (there is now only one). At the time, the league said that the marketing and endorsement opportunities helped reach that threshold. While the China venture certainly helps with cash flow, Hefford stressed that a large reason the CWHL is there is for the opportunities it affords the athletes and the league's larger mission, which is to grow the game.
The CWHL's budget for the 2017-18 season was $3.7 million, and Hefford said the budget for the 2018-19 season is somewhere in that "ballpark."
The NWHL does not disclose any information about its budget or revenue. Only some of the investors are made public. That has been a point of contention for the NWHLPA, especially in contract negotiations, in which it wanted to know how the league arrived at $100,000 for the salary cap.
The NWHL did boast some encouraging numbers regarding attendance. In their first NWHL season as the league's first expansion team, the Minnesota Whitecaps sold out every home game. TRIA Rink in Saint Paul has a capacity of 1,200. The Boston Pride sold out their past three home games (arena capacity: 800). Since the Beauts are privately owned, their attendance figures are not available, though reports suggest that crowds at their arena (capacity: 1,800) have been strong. The average ticket price for all teams is around $20.
The 2019 NWHL All-Star Game in Nashville drew 6,200, the largest crowd for a pro women's hockey game in the U.S. Combined, the skills challenge and All-Star Game generated more than one million viewers on Twitter.
If things are going so great, why is there a need for change?
The visibility of the leagues is improving, as is the on-ice product. "The optics of the league are really strong," Battaglino said. "The product is better on the ice, the players are stronger, the game is getting better every single year, and we're continuously fostering higher-quality-caliber players coming into our league. I don't want that to sound like we are totally screwed on the back end of it, but there's a lot of room for improvements."
In the beginning of the season, the Riveters did not have a designated practice facility, and players were getting last-minute notices about meeting locations, bouncing around New Jersey while adding hundreds of miles to their odometers.
Balancing other jobs and low resources makes for less than ideal travel itineraries. The league initially set an itinerary for the Boston Pride's playoff game in Buffalo with a bus leaving Boston at 6 p.m. ET Friday and not arriving in Buffalo until 4 a.m. ET Saturday -- with the playoff game being played Saturday night. The bus would then leave Buffalo after the game Saturday, at roughly 11 p.m. ET, and arrive in Boston at 6 or 7 a.m. ET Sunday. Such long and taxing bus trips are common across many levels of hockey (including leagues with more resources, such as the AHL).
When Boston coach Paul Mara -- a former NHL player -- said those were less than ideal conditions, especially for a playoff game, he asked if the league would fly his players instead. The league said if that were the case, players would need to get to Buffalo on their own. The league would offer hotel rooms for two nights but only a $200 stipend for travel, which would not have covered the cost of flights, and players would need to cover some of their own costs, including getting from the airport to hotel, hotel to rink, etc. Some players took the league up on this option; the league then dispatched a smaller vehicle for players who did not fly.
Said Simanca-Proctor: "I respect and admire Dani's efforts to create this league. She identified a strong female professional ice hockey fan base and has taken steps to promote the sport. However, when issues arise -- for example, the untimely payment of salaries -- the response has often been, 'We're working on it. We're trying.' That response was acceptable in the league's first year, perhaps the second, but not in year four. These women deserve better, and they deserve to work for a more professional organization."
In NWHL player contracts this season, there was a clause that said players "will not directly or indirectly make, publish or communicate in any form or to any person or entity any disparaging or defamatory remarks, comments or statements, whether orally or in writing, by word or gesture, about each other, the other NWHL teams, the League Commissioner, or the League." The NWHLPA tried to get the non-disparagement clause removed from the contracts but found that the language was so ambiguous, the league would be hard-pressed to prove a violation of this provision in a lawsuit. One NWHL player said she wouldn't feel comfortable speaking out against the league. She also said that though the league isn't perfect, she feels "fortunate" that there is a place for her to continue playing, and she wouldn't want to jeopardize that.
Why are the leagues important?
There's a growing demand for women's hockey. Last July, the IIHF shared that there are now nearly 200,000 women playing hockey across the world -- up from 170,000 (a 17.6 percent increase) in 2010. It's especially noticeable in the United States. USA Hockey's membership statistics suggest a hugely growing demand. There were 79,355 registered hockey players in the U.S. in 2017-18, which is more than 3,500 more than in the previous season. The leagues offer girls playing hockey a tangible dream and an opportunity to play after their college careers are over. Moreover, they can continue development for elite players. Consider recent women's national team call-ups Hayley Scamurra and Katie Burt, who were able to keep playing and showing off their skills in the NWHL, which caught the attention of the national team.
How are games viewed now?
The NWHL, from the beginning, has prioritized having all games streamed on YouTube or Twitter. It's a significant cost investment. The next step for the league would be to find a broadcast rights and content partner.
The CWHL sets a budget early in the season for streaming. It streamed 18 games this season (there are 80 in the season, so that's roughly 20 percent). The league has a deal with Sportsnet, which carries its All-Star Game and Clarkson Cup and in January picked up two additional games for the first CWHL weekend. Hefford said there is no flexibility once the budget for streaming is allotted, so some high-profile matchups toward the end of the season were dark for many fans. However, all teams are allowed to find their own partners for streaming or broadcasting games on the radio or YouTube. All teams had some alternative options for the 2018-19 season, except for Montreal.
What does an ideal league look like?
It depends whom you ask. Here's what Hefford told ESPN: "An ideal league to me would be four to six teams. The players would be paid a living wage, whatever that is described as. It's certainly not going to be hundreds of thousands, but it's a salary that you can live on in a major city because that's more than likely where the teams will be. You'd want the best players in the league. I think that having the NHL involved would be a big part of that. I wouldn't say it is the NHL, but having their involvement and their brand and resources is important to it. That's where I see the game going."
And here's Battagliano: "For the NHL to come in like big brother and give whatever model they think is right? I've heard rumblings of what that model would be, and to be honest with you, it's really challenging for me to think that's necessarily the best option. I don't know if both leagues folding and the NHL stepping in and running it however they would like is the best option. I believe that what we've done with the Beauts is the best option for women's hockey. That's what I believe. I think that certainly comes from one league and certainly comes from joining forces -- putting all the same people in one pool, I'm 100 percent in on that. Maybe there's a Northern Division in Canada and a Southern Division in the U.S., and every team is owned by an NHL affiliate. I think when the Pegulas bought the Beauts, they set the standard that's tough to beat. That sounds like the world I wish I lived in. That's my utopia."
One prominent NWHL player told ESPN that it is "very important" for a woman to be in a leadership role running the league. "That said," the player added, "I think we all know for us to be sustainable, we need some resources from the NHL."

Angela James, the first woman inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, is part of the 11-woman NHL/NHLPA Female Hockey Advisory Committee dedicated to accelerating the growth of female hockey in North America.
The past 13 months have brought great momentum for women's hockey in America. Last February, the United States defeated Canada in an epic Olympic final to capture the Americans' first Olympic gold in two decades. In January, Kendall Coyne Schofield became the first woman to participate in the NHL All-Star Weekend skills competition. As a replacement for NHL star Nathan MacKinnon in the fastest skater competition, Coyne Schofield said it was a moment she knew would "break a lot of barriers."
The NHL is trying to keep that momentum going.
The NHL and NHLPA made a joint announcement Friday -- on International Women's Day -- that they would be launching a Female Hockey Advisory Committee, which is "dedicated to accelerating the growth of female hockey in North America while also ensuring more women and girls have the opportunity to experience the benefits that hockey offers."
The 11 women on the inaugural committee are Michele Amidon, Annie Camins, Maria Dennis, Mandi Duhamel, Lyndsey Fry, Angela James, Tarasai Karega, Kelsey Koelzer, AJ Mleczko Griswold, Caroline Popilchak and Kristen Wright.
According to an NHL spokesperson, the whole point of the committee is to get strong voices across hockey -- from all parties, in the U.S. and Canada, in the NWHL and the CWHL -- together to hash out ideas. They are expected to meet regularly.


Rivalry Series a boost for women's hockey

Coyne Schofield 1st woman in skills competition

Islanders blazing new path with three women on broadcast team

Dennis, who is the NHLPA director of player health and safety and associate counsel, is serving as the committee chairperson.
There's a blend of perspective in the group, ranging from the 54-year-old James, one of the first superstars in women's hockey, to 23-year-old Koelzer, a current NWHL player who is the first African-American drafted No. 1 overall in any North American professional hockey league. Fry, who also has begun working with the Arizona Coyotes this season, is the first person from Arizona -- male or female -- to play ice hockey in the Olympics. Last spring, Mleczko became the first woman to work as an in-booth analyst in an NHL postseason game for NBC.
Dennis says the goal of the group "is to ultimately help grow the game, and we are looking forward to working together on this meaningful endeavor." James, who was inducted to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2010, called it "a great opportunity for women on both sides of the border to come together in an effort to keep women's hockey on an upward trend."
Last July, the IIHF shared that there are now nearly 200,000 women playing hockey across the world -- up from 170,000 (a 17.6 percent increase) in 2010. It's especially noticeable in the U.S. USA Hockey's membership statistics suggest a hugely growing demand. In 2017-18, the growth of women's registration for USA hockey was nearly 6.5 times greater than the growth in men's registrations. There were 79,355 registered hockey players in the U.S. 2017-18, which is more than 3,500 from the previous season.
The biggest goal for women's hockey right now is to create one professional sports league -- which would likely include some kind of merger of the CWHL and NWHL -- to pool the resources and talent for something sustainable. It is believed the NHL will eventually get involved with a women's professional league in North America but will not get involved as long as both leagues are in their current iteration because, it does not want to choose sides or swoop in to fix the situation.

Player X is in the NHL. After home games, he has a routine. Typically, he'll meet a few teammates at a local restaurant for a late dinner. He likes to order steak after games -- medium rare, with a side salad and mashed potatoes. Then he'll go home.
Player X sometimes has a hard time unwinding; it was a day of unbounded stimulation. He woke up and arrived at the rink for a morning skate and meetings, went home to nap, returned to the arena for warm-ups (bright lights and eardrum-blasting music), then exerted his body for 20-something sub-one-minute shifts during which he shoves, sprints, reaches, shoots, gets hit and sometimes bleeds on the ice. By the time he gets home at night, he needs something to ease the process of getting to bed. So he'll often reach for his weed pen and take a few hits. "Just to relax," he says. "Honestly, it's the easiest and most natural way for me to fall asleep and be ready for the next day."
Because Player X is on a Western Conference team based in a state in which there are broad laws legalizing marijuana, he knows he's not doing anything wrong. Actually, he's doing what he estimates thousands of others who live in his city do every night as well.
And because he plays in the NHL -- and not, say, the NFL, NBA or MLB -- he knows he won't be punished.
Society's views on marijuana are evolving -- fast. On Oct. 16, Canada became the largest country in the world to legalize recreational marijuana. Coupled with results from the midterm elections in the United States, this is the landscape: Of the 31 teams in the NHL, 28 play in states where players have access to legal marijuana, whether it is for medicinal or recreational purposes. That's the highest percentage (90.3) of any of the major four North American pro leagues, but hardly an anomaly.
This might surprise you: Of the 123 teams across MLB, the NBA, NHL and NFL, 45 play in states or provinces where recreational marijuana is legal (36.6 percent). Another 56 play in jurisdictions where medical marijuana is legal (45.5 percent). That's a whopping 82 percent of teams (101 of 123) that are playing in areas where their employees can legally purchase either medicinal or recreational marijuana.
In fact, the only places in which any of the four major pro league teams play where there are no broad laws legalizing marijuana are Indiana, Georgia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin. That list could shrink soon.
Legislation for legalizing medical marijuana in North Carolina is expected this year. Recently elected Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers advocated for legalizing medicinal marijuana on his official campaign website. There have been political hurdles in Texas, though a current bill on the table calls to decriminalize small amounts, which could open the door for more marijuana-friendly legislation. Even though bills in Nashville to decriminalize small amounts of marijuana were shot down by then-Gov. Bill Haslam, a new statewide bill is up for approval, proposing the same thing.
Yet drug policies in most of these leagues are still punishing players for consuming cannabis. All four drug policies are collectively bargained between the leagues and their respective players' unions.
Let's take a quick tour of NFL, MLB and NBA policies compared to the NHL's:
• NFL players with no previous violations are tested just once in the offseason. During the regular season, 10 players per team are randomly selected each week. A positive test means a referral to the substance abuse program. A second violation results in a fine of two game checks. A third violation is four game checks. The fourth violation is a four-game suspension. The fifth violation is a 10-game suspension, and the sixth violation results in a one-year banishment.
Dallas Cowboys pass-rusher Randy Gregory bottomed out a year ago and sought help for depression, drugs and other issues. Today, he is playing football again, fighting to stay clean and help his team to the playoffs. It's December, and there's hope.
The league did relax its stance somewhat in 2014, when it upped the minimum levels for a positive test from 15 nanograms of THC per milliliter of blood or urine to 35 nanograms. Wide receiver Josh Gordon (currently suspended indefinitely) and Dallas Cowboys defensive end Randy Gregory (who went 616 days between regular-season games because of suspensions) are cautionary tales of what happens once you are flagged in the system.
• The NBA does not test its players for marijuana in the offseason. Players are subject to four random tests during the regular season. A first positive test means a player must enter the marijuana program. The second positive test calls for a $25,000 fine. The third infraction is a five-game suspension, and five more games are added to each ensuing violation (10 games for a fourth positive test, 15 games for a fifth, etc.).
• MLB's marijuana policy is a bit different. The league does not test players for drugs of abuse. It only conducts testing on drugs such as marijuana if the MLB or union officials have "reasonable cause" to do so. MLB's threshold is 50 nanograms/milliliter. If a player tests positive, he might be subject to a treatment plan that can include progressive fines of up to $35,000 for one test. A player will be suspended only if they "flagrantly disregard the rules," or are believed to be a "threat" to fellow players' safety.
Minor league players, who are not covered in the CBA, are regularly tested and face steep fines for positive tests -- and there's little recourse. For example, in 2018, St. Louis Cardinals prospect Griffin Roberts received a 50-game suspension. "I'd like to apologize to the St. Louis Cardinals Organization and fans for violating MiLB's drug testing policy for cannabis," Roberts wrote in a tweet.
The NHL's stance? Officials from both the NHL and NHLPA say the goal of their testing procedures is not to punish offenders but rather identify those who need help and offer them help. "In today's world, I think we're largely consistent with how people are approaching these things," NHL deputy commissioner Bill Daly said. "For a program that was originally developed in 1996, when the world was a lot different, it was extremely progressive in terms of how we dealt with these issues."
Added NHLPA executive director Donald Fehr: "There's two different kinds of chemical substances, for lack of a better word. There are those that people feel can or do affect performance, and then you have others that can or may be abused. Then you have questions of legality. We live in a culture in which, when it comes to the latter thing, generationally there has been and continues to be an ongoing shift in attitudes. You want to try to reflect that. From a personal standpoint -- and this is personal -- I don't think there ought to be an intrusion into somebody's life without an awfully good reason."
How the NHL is different? Well, pretend you're Player X. He is subject to teamwide, no-notice testing once during training camp and once during the regular season. He can also be selected for random testing during the regular season and playoffs. Say his team makes the playoffs this season. He might be randomly tested, but only a maximum of 60 players are.
If the NHL or NHLPA has information including reasonable cause that he took a prohibited substance, he could also be subject to a test. Around 2,300 urine tests are taken in a given year.
So what exactly are they testing for?
Up until the 2016-17 season, all urine tests were screened for substances on the NHL/NHLPA's banned list. Then, 30 percent of those tests were given additional screening, looking for drugs of abuse -- such as cocaine or marijuana. This is called survey testing.
However, a change was made in July 2016. Now labs screen 100 percent of the urine tests for drugs of abuse. When asked for the impetus for the change, Daly said the league had wanted to do this for some time. (Any change in policy must jointly be agreed upon between the league and players' association). However, it should be noted that in October 2015, Daly said in an interview with TSN that he was concerned about the number of cocaine positives the league was seeing in survey testing.
Here's where things get interesting: Let's say Player X's test comes back positive for a drug of abuse (which it very well might considering his propensity for the weed pen). He is not going to be punished.
Dr. Dave Lewis and Dr. Brian Shaw are the physicians who run the NHL and NHLPA's joint Substance Abuse and Behavioral Health (SABH) Program. If they determine Player X's test features "abnormally high levels" of THC, they flag it. The veil of anonymity is then lifted, and the two doctors will contact Player X. They can recommend he enters the SABH, in which they'll develop an individualized treatment plan for him. Neither the NHL nor NHLPA needs to know that he's in the program.
The league won't punish Player X at all for his test. If he chooses to enter the SABH, Dr. Lewis and Dr. Shaw have the power to levy fines, suspensions or other penalties if conditions are breached. However, the player is not required to enter the program if he doesn't want to.
"The thing that we're really looking for is if there's a guy that has an issue or a problem and he needs help -- that's what we're trying to capture in that program," says longtime NHL defenseman Mathieu Schneider, now a senior executive at the NHLPA. "I do think it has worked very well. We have a tremendous amount of faith in the doctors that run the program. Confidentiality in that program is of the utmost importance."
This NHL season began with the best player in the world asking, why wouldn't you look into the benefits of marijuana?
"I say this more talking about the CBD side of it, obviously: You'd be stupid not to at least look into it," Edmonton Oilers star Connor McDavid told The Associated Press in a preseason interview. "When your body's sore like it is sometimes, you don't want to be taking pain stuff and taking Advil all the time. There's obviously better ways to do it. ... You're seeing a lot of smart guys look into it. You're seeing a lot of really smart doctors look into it. If all the boxes are checked there and it's safe and everything like that, then I think you would maybe hear them out."
But to McDavid's point, it's not as simple as smoking pot. It's important to understand a bit about cannabis. As outlined in an Oct. 16 memorandum to NHL teams -- on the eve of Canada's broad legalization -- CBD is a type of compound, called a cannabinoid, which comes from the plant cannabis sativa L. (or, as it is commonly known, marijuana). Another type of cannabinoid is tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the primary psychoactive compound in cannabis. CBD is purported to provide certain health-related benefits, such as pain relief, while lacking the psychoactive properties of THC. In late December 2018, President Donald Trump signed the farm bill into law, essentially making hemp-based CBD oil legal. However, there are three states that refuse to abide by the federal government's classifications: Iowa, Nebraska and South Dakota.
THC is considered a drug of abuse. If a player is tested with "high levels," he will be referred to the SABH program for evaluation. Even though CBD is not on the banned substance list, the Oct. 16 memorandum warned players that "it is not uncommon for CBD products manufactured in China, Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam to be contaminated with drugs of abuse or prohibited substances." Therefore, players who use a CBD product might be at risk. Even with increased interest in cannabis products, the NHL did not see a need to revise its policy.
The NHL did not put an edict out to team doctors of Canadian-based teams of whether they can or cannot prescribe cannabis products, though it will be interesting to see whether any do, considering the consequences of carrying cannabis across international borders. Players, of course, can seek out treatment on their own outside the confines of an NHL facility.
The medical properties of cannabis are continuously being explored. Last week, the NHL alumni association signed an agreement with a Canadian cannabis company to determine whether it can help ex-players quit opioids. Over the next year, 100 NHL players in the Toronto area will participate in a double blind randomized study; if the results are encouraging, the company will fund a second study.
Is the NHL's marijuana policy the model of the future? The NFL's CBA expires after the 2020 season, and it's believed the drug policy will be a major discussion point. The NFLPA probably will argue for something similar to the NHL's policy -- test for marijuana, but don't punish it -- and it will be worth monitoring if the NFL agrees. The NBA and NBPA have had ongoing discussions about their marijuana policy, with commissioner Adam Silver seemingly open to reform, being quoted several times as saying, "We should follow the science."
There are potential pitfalls to the NHL's policy. The league's lax attitude on marijuana is one thing. However, some have raised concerns about the same loose attitude toward other drugs of abuse. If the NHL really had concern about a cocaine problem in the league, does this policy do anything to help? What about prescription pills? One veteran NHL agent raised this point, while noting entry into the SABH is voluntary. Though the appointed doctors can highly encourage a player to enter the program, the player ultimately has the ability to say no and refuse treatment.
"It hurts to say this, because I am always on the players' side and advocating for players, and I would never advocate for a situation for a team to increase the ability to discipline a player, but there are a lot of players who act recklessly," the agent says. "I think cocaine is still a huge problem in the league. I think there are other drugs that players are abusing. If it was known the league was testing and punishing for cocaine, levels of Ambien, Adderall and a whole list of other list of drugs that get abused, I think you would naturally have players cutting down on it. Unless players face a suspension or loss of pay, what would get their attention?"
Which brings us back to Player X. "I think it comes down to this -- we are elite athletes and as long as it's not performance-enhancing or illegal, we know what's best for our own bodies," he says. "I find that a couple hits of weed at night is good for me. It's legal, it's natural, I don't see anything wrong with it."

The 2019 NHL deadline has passed, and a few things are clear: The Western Conference was an arms race, the trade market never produced the kind of obscene returns many figured it would, the Senators and Rangers have more picks than Guitar Center, and the Blue Jackets had better make the playoffs. Like, seriously, they have to now, right?
Here's the report card for the 2019 NHL trade deadline. Congrats to those whose parents will proudly hang this on their fridge.
Read through all 31 teams by grade order, or skip ahead to your favorite by clicking on its logo here:

Key additions: F Gustav Nyquist, F Jonathan Dahlen
Key subtractions: 2019 second-round pick, 2020 conditional third-round pick, C Linus Karlsson

Nyquist is the quintessential deadline grab for GM Doug Wilson and the Sharks: a versatile goal-scorer who could play up in the lineup or settle into a depth scoring role, perhaps with center Joe Thornton. San Jose has an impressive offense this season (3.62 goals per game) but that extra bit of "oomph" could be the difference in the postseason ... provided Nyquist, a playoff underachiever, can provide it. The son of Ulf Dahlen, who played for six different teams (including San Jose) over 14 seasons in his career, Jonathan Dahlen fell into the Sharks' laps when he requested a trade from Vancouver; he's a prospect with considerable upside.
The Blue Jackets and Predators made smart additions, while the Bruins and Penguins misfired. We identify the best and worst around the league.
We grade all the big trades for the 2018-19 season, beginning with the summer moves up through the Feb. 25 deadline.
Stay updated with all the moves completed during the 2018-19 season.
Key additions: none
Key subtractions: none

The current Lightning roster is on pace to have the largest point total in the NHL since 1995-96, and could threaten the all-time mark of 132 set by the 1976-77 Montreal Canadiens. The only thing they could have added was some goaltending insurance, but that's it. They're good. Let's go.
Key additions: F Kevin Hayes, D Nathan Beaulieu, F Matt Hendricks, F Par Lindholm
Key subtractions: F Brendan Lemieux, 2019 first-round pick, F Nic Petan, 2019 sixth-round pick, 2020 seventh-round pick

Once again, the Jets shore up their biggest weakness -- the second-line center spot -- ahead of the deadline. Just as Paul Stastny proved to be a good fit as Patrik Laine's center last spring, the Jets are hoping Hayes can do the same. The Jets were always willing to part with their 2019 first-round pick (which should be low) if it helped them win now. Lemieux was a redundancy low in Winnipeg's lineup (Andrew Copp does the same things Lemieux can, but better). What's more: The Jets didn't have to give up more prized young forwards, like Jack Roslovic, which they might have had to do for Mark Stone. Beaulieu and Hendricks are solid depth additions.
Key additions: F Wayne Simmonds, F Mikael Granlund
Key subtractions: F Kevin Fiala, F Ryan Hartman, 2020 conditional fourth-round pick

David Poile just can't operate quietly, can he? (He definitely can't when the other contenders around the West are adding, too.) The Predators have struggled with production outside their top line, and they improved in the middle six with the additions of Granlund and Simmonds; Nashville is hoping Simmonds can specifically help on the power play, which has been dreadful. The 30-year-old reunites with coach Peter Laviolette and adds a physical net-front presence. It's never good to give up on a 22-year-old first-round pick, but Fiala wasn't taking the next step, and Granlund is simply a better player. He's also not a rental, under contract through next season. The Preds overpaid for Hartman at last year's deadline, and were able to admit their mistake by shipping him to Philly as part of the Simmonds deal.
Key additions: F Brendan Lemieux, 2019 conditional first-round pick, 2019 conditional second-round pick, 2019 fourth-round pick, 2019 seventh-round pick, 2020 conditional third-round pick, 2022 conditional fourth-round pick, D Julius Bergman
Key subtractions: F Mats Zuccarello, D Adam McQuaid, F Kevin Hayes

The Rangers sent "the letter" early last February, and we have to give them credit for staying on message so far. They said they would part with familiar faces and they have (only three players remain from the 2014-15 Presidents' Trophy-winning team). They said they would stockpile for the future, and boy have they ever. New York's haul of draft picks is envious. They have five picks in the first two rounds of the upcoming draft alone, including potentially three first-rounders (if the Lightning win the Cup).
Considering the market for the other forwards, the Rangers got more than a fair price for Zuccarello. They did especially well in the Hayes deal, luring another first-round pick (albeit probably a low one) from Winnipeg, as well as Lemieux, an NHL-ready player who plays a tough game and can be a stopgap in the rebuild.
Key additions: F Anthony Duclair, 2020 second-rounder (Columbus), 2021 second-rounder (Columbus), F Vitaly Abramov, F Jonathan Davidsson, 2019 first-round pick (Columbus, top-three protected), conditional 2020 first-round pick (Columbus), D Erik Brannstrom, F Oscar Lindberg, 2020 second-rounder (Dallas, via Vegas)
Key subtractions: F Matt Duchene, F Mark Stone, F Ryan Dzingel

Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan bring in ESPN NHL draft and prospects analyst Chris Peters for the trade deadline wrap-up show. The three discuss all of the deals that were completed, including Vegas' acquisition of RW Mark Stone (13:02). Plus, Wayne Simmonds is heading to Nashville (24:56). Listen »
Consider the circumstances, wherein GM Pierre Dorion could only offer what his thrifty owner was willing to spend in order to keep someone like Mark Stone under contract. Consider the context, wherein everyone knew these three players had to move, lest Ottawa lose them for nothing this summer. Consider the return: three seconds, a first and another first if Matt Duchene remains in Columbus; two decent prospects and one absolute blue-chipper in puck-moving defenseman Brannstrom, whose inclusion in the Stone deal by Vegas left many stunned. (Please recall Vegas GM George McPhee was The Man Who Traded Filip Forsberg, too.) Finally, consider where the bar was set for Dorion at this deadline: Don't get fleeced, and give Senators fans something they can latch on to for hope. All things considered, we believe Dorion accomplished that.
Key additions: F Mark Stone
Key subtractions: D Erik Brannstrom, F Oscar Lindberg, Dallas' second-round pick in 2020
There's no denying the impact Stone will have on Vegas in the short term as a top-line right wing, and in the long term as an elite two-way forward who signed an eight-year extension with a $9.5 million average annual value. But he came with a price: Losing Brannstrom is significant, as some scouts see him as a future star. But the Knights are loaded on the farm and on the current roster with defensemen, and Stone was one of the few players available around the deadline who could possibly be worth that price. Congrats to owner Bill Foley and GM George McPhee for winning that derby and getting the Golden Knights a bit closer to returning to the Stanley Cup Final.

Key additions: D Brandon Montour
Key subtractions: D Brendan Guhle, 2019 first-round pick (San Jose's or St. Louis')

The Sabres absolutely needed to upgrade their blue line, and in Montour they get a 24-year-old right-handed-shot defenseman with offensive upside. It was clear he took a step back this season, but it was also clear he took a step back during a lost season for the Ducks. The Sabres have him at $3,387,500 in average annual value for this season and next, before he becomes an RFA with arbitration rights. In a new environment, and under the tutelage of Phil Housley, this could be a coup for GM Jason Botterill. Guhle is a good prospect who slid down the depth chart. The first will either be from either San Jose or St. Louis (both owned by Buffalo) based on the final order of selection in the 2019 draft.
Key additions: F Matt Duchene, F Ryan Dzingel, D Adam McQuaid, G Keith Kinkaid, 2019 seventh-round pick
Key subtractions: F Anthony Duclair, 2019 conditional first-round pick, 2019 fourth-round pick, 2019 seventh-round pick, 2020 conditional first-round pick, 2020 second-round pick, 2021 second-round pick, 2022 fifth-round pick

Did anyone envy Jarmo Kekalainen this season? When it was determined that two of the team's most talented players in franchise history were going to hit free agency this summer, the GM faced franchise-altering decisions. Instead of pitying himself, Kekalainen acted boldly -- in a way, frankly, we've seen few GMs behave before him. Kekalainen has demanded his team go all-in with his flurry of moves (and not dealing away Artemi Panarin and Sergei Bobrovsky). The Blue Jackets will attempt to re-sign who they can over the summer and figure out the consequences later. This is a team that has patiently built the right way, but decided enough was enough. The franchise has yet to get past the first round. By hoarding rentals -- including its own, Panarin and Bobrovsky -- the Jackets are loaded for a playoff push in a year when the Metropolitan Division is ripe for an upstart.
Key additions: F Jordan Weal
Key subtractions: F Michael Chaput

The Canadiens added Weal to Nate Thompson and Dale Weise in their depth moves this month. GM Marc Bergevin didn't overpay for someone like Matt Duchene, kept his draft picks and kept the focus on the summer, when the Habs have some internal and external questions to answer, especially on the blue line.
Key additions: 2019 second-round pick, 2020 fourth-round pick, 2022 fifth-round pick
Key subtractions: G Keith Kinkaid, F Marcus Johansson

The 2022 fifth-round pick -- so far away in the future -- is a comical return for Kinkaid. But the truth is, the goalie wasn't helping the Devils win this season, and on a non-playoff team, he didn't have value. His departure gives New Jersey an extended look at youngster MacKenzie Blackwood, who impressed in his 13 appearances this season. The return for Johansson was decent considering how conservative teams were in handing out first- and second-round picks this trade deadline (he also had a modified no-trade clause that limited the options). Overall, the Devils added capital for their rebuild, which is a win.
Key additions: none
Key subtractions: none
The 2019 NHL draft is June 21-22 in Vancouver, British Columbia. Get ready with the latest prospect rankings and our mock draft.
• Mock Draft 1.0
• Top 50 draft prospects
» More coverage of the NHL draft

Nobody knew exactly what the Islanders were going to do, because GM Lou Lamoriello runs a tight-lipped organization. History tells us that when Lamoriello believes his team is good enough to win, he goes for it. So does he not believe in these Islanders or did he not want to tinker with the good juju coach Barry Trotz had fostered? It's probably more of the latter. Also, we believe the Islanders checked in on some of the bigger available names, but shied away from the high price tags. This is the team showing restraint so it can try to go for it now with a decent roster, without mortgaging the future.
Key additions: D Michael Del Zotto
Key subtractions: 2019 sixth-round pick

We're not primarily judging the Blues on their acquisition of Del Zotto. The well-traveled (and oft-injured) defenseman is a depth piece, if anything. We're grading the Blues on doing nothing at all -- which is exactly what they should have done. St. Louis has been one of the hottest teams in the NHL this calendar year. Thanks to solid goaltending from Jordan Binnington, renewed defensive structure and chemistry under interim coach Craig Berube, this group is heating up at the right time, and should not be tinkered with. Also, it's nice to see hometown boy Patrick Maroon stick around for the playoff push; he had a rough start to his one-year deal, but the big-bodied forward could have a big presence in the postseason.
Key additions: F Michael Chaput
Key subtractions: F Jordan Weal

The Coyotes were content to let their players returning from injury -- Christian Dvorak, Brad Richardson, Jason Demers and hopefully Michael Grabner and Antti Raanta -- act as their trade deadline infusion of talent. GM John Chayka doesn't exactly have an open checkbook to acquire talent, which might necessitate this approach; but one wonders whether the in-house reinforcements are enough to negate the need for outside reinforcements for their playoff push.
Key additions: Conditional 2019 second-round pick from San Jose, 2020 second-round pick from Washington, conditional 2020 third-round pick from San Jose, D Madison Bowey
Key subtractions: F Gustav Nyquist, D Nick Jensen

Not a bad haul for GM Ken Holland in dealing away two expiring contracts, especially if the Sharks make the Stanley Cup Final or re-sign Nyquist and that third becomes a second. Bowey has to prove he's an NHL regular, but not a bad addition for Jensen. Holland didn't get a fleece job like that Tomas Tatar deal last deadline, but given the market and the assets, this wasn't terrible. Well, except the part where he gave 10 players on his roster trade protection (including Nyquist and, hilariously, Thomas Vanek), which meant his options were extremely limited.
Key additions: F Tanner Pearson, C Linus Karlsson
Key subtractions: D Erik Gudbranson, F Jonathan Dahlen

Turning Gudbranson into anything, let alone an NHL talent like Pearson, is impressive, considering his ghastly underlying numbers and a $4 million annual cap hit through 2021. Luckily for the Canucks, Pittsburgh overvalued his physicality. Losing Dahlen, who requested a trade, hurts the Canucks; he's an enormously talented -- if somewhat speed-deficient -- player, but he wasn't clicking in the AHL. Karlsson reportedly better fits the Vancouver system, although the Canucks need to sign him.
Key additions: F Nic Petan
Key subtractions: F Par Lindholm

The Leafs made their big deadline move weeks beforehand with the addition of Jake Muzzin. They failed to address additional needs on defense and decided to hang on to the expiring contract of Jake Gardiner. They didn't add a physical piece up front, whether that was going to be Wayne Simmonds or not. But to their credit, they also didn't do something stupid in order to satiate the dinosaurs in the local media who thought they needed a player like Adam McQuaid because teams are mean to them. GM Kyle Dubas is playing the long game and managing his cap well ahead of a critical offseason. For what it's worth, Petan is a nice add.
Key additions: F Carl Hagelin, D Nick Jensen
Key subtractions: D Madison Bowey, 2019 third-round pick, 2020 second-round pick, 2020 conditional sixth-round pick

Brian McLellan telegraphed that he wanted two things: an NHL-ready forward (especially if the team was going to trade away Andre Burakovsky) and this year's version of Michal Kempny. The Caps didn't end up parting with Burakovsky. They did get Carl Hagelin, who has playoff experience and can help on the penalty kill (which ranks 23rd in the NHL). They also got Nick Jensen, an underrated defenseman a la Kempny, and subsequently signed him to a four-year extension. Both of these moves bolster the Capitals, but don't necessarily move the needle. Then again, this roster -- despite a midseason slump -- was already good enough to win a Stanley Cup.
Key additions: D Oscar Fantenberg
Key subtractions: conditional 2020 fourth-round pick

For a surprisingly quiet deadline -- Fantenberg was their only move -- the Flames made a lot of noise about the prices they weren't willing to pay for high-end forwards such as Mark Stone. A trade on deadline day for the Wild's Jason Zucker also fell through. At 39-16-7 and leading the Pacific Division, the Flames earned the right to stand pat, in theory. But the arms race in the West, and questions about the playoff-readiness of their goaltending, make that stand a little less palatable.
Key additions: none
Key subtractions: none
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.

Did two big Central Division losses directly preceding the trade deadline prevent the Blackhawks from making bigger moves and going for it? Probably not. GM Stan Bowman is viewing this season as one of transition. The bigger splash could come in the summer, when Chicago clears some cap space. As long as the players with no-movement clauses (such as Brent Seabrook and Duncan Keith) have little interest in going elsewhere, Bowman couldn't have done anything drastic during the season. The GM might have been able to muster something, though, for Artem Anisimov or John Hayden, two players who have run their course in Chicago.
Key additions: F Derick Brassard
Key subtractions: 2020 third-round pick

We didn't expect much from the Avalanche this year. It's as if GM Joe Sakic knew last season was a pleasant surprise, but the long-range plan is still intact. With two first-rounders in this draft (including what is expected to be a very high pick courtesy of the Ottawa Senators), plus high-end prospects such as Cale Makar, Connor Timmens, Shane Bowers and Martin Kaut on the way, the future is bright. But the Avs are technically still in the hunt this season, and Brassard could help shore up the middle six, theoretically boosting the club's lackluster secondary production. But let's remember: Brassard stalled in his last semi-permanent stop in Pittsburgh, and the Avalanche gave up a third-round pick for a player who is probably not enough to help them reach the playoffs.
Key additions: 2019 third-round pick, 2019 fourth-round pick
Key subtractions: C Nate Thompson, F Carl Hagelin
Ilya Kovalchuk, Jeff Carter, Tyler Toffoli, Alec Martinez and Jonathan Quick were all reportedly available, and all remain with the Kings. Otherwise, it was a couple of minor pending free-agent dumps for middling picks. The market just wasn't there for a Kings blockbuster.

Key additions: F Marcus Johansson, F Charlie Coyle
Key subtractions: F Ryan Donato, 2019 second-round pick, 2020 fourth-round pick

You know what you're getting with Johansson. He's a 200-foot player who's able to play up and down the lineup, including with outstanding offensive players like David Krejci. He's inconsistent, a bit injury-prone, but a nice addition. I'm not sure you know what you get with Charlie Coyle, whom the Bruins are going to use as a No. 3 center but might end up being better as a No. 2 winger. This could end up working out for the B's, and it's important to note that GM Don Sweeney added assets while their division rivals stood pat. But these aren't slam dunks.
Key additions: F Jean-Sebastien Dea, F Cliff Pu, 2020 third-round pick
Key subtractions: C Derick Brassard, D Chris Wideman, F Tomas Jurco

The Panthers went big-game hunting for Mark Stone and couldn't match the Golden Knights. Instead, they sold low on Brassard, made a small move for depth forward Dea and engaged in a strange move with Carolina in which the Hurricanes acquired Jurco and they acquired Pu, but not one-for-one. (Theory: The Hurricanes didn't want the hockey world to eye-roll the Jeff Skinner deal even further because now, by proxy, it would have been for Jurco.) Trading Nick Bjugstad and Jared McCann to Pittsburgh will remain the Panthers' key deadline-adjacent move. The best thing to happen to Florida at the deadline? No one traded for Sergei Bobrovsky or Artemi Panarin, meaning both could still take their talents to South Beach this summer.
Key additions: none
Key subtractions: none

The Hurricanes received plenty of interest in Michael Ferland but decided not to move the winger. Rather, they rewarded a roster that has turned it up lately with their own "rental" in keeping him. Ferland, who wants bigger money than Carolina is willing to offer, is likely to walk this summer. Though the team has shown improvement, depth scoring is still a major issue. The Hurricanes had an opportunity to take their area of surplus (capable defensemen) and leverage it into a forward who can score goals. They didn't do that, and it's safe to wonder whether that might end up costing them a playoff spot.
Key additions: F Ryan Donato, F Kevin Fiala, 2020 seventh-round pick
Key subtractions: F Charlie Coyle, F Mikael Granlund

Paul Fenton is no longer the new GM (he has been on the job for nine months) and this trade deadline marks his first personal stamp on the roster. Gone are Coyle and Granlund, two 26-or-under players once believed to be an important part of the future core. Swapping Granlund for Fiala is a risk, considering Fiala has been wildly inconsistent in Nashville. Fenton is betting on a player he believed in when he helped draft him in Nashville. The Donato acquisition makes sense because his style -- specifically, a shoot-first mentality -- can help the Wild, while Coyle had stalled and had been on the trade block for some time.
Key additions: F Ryan Hartman, conditional fourth-round pick
Key subtractions: F Wayne Simmonds
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+

Parting with Simmonds at the trade deadline felt like an inevitability under the old regime of Ron Hextall, and the new regime as well -- considering these Flyers, despite doing some good things lately, are not a playoff-caliber team. With all that time on the block, shouldn't Philadelphia have been able to muster more than it did for the rugged, playoff-ready winger? By trading Simmonds in the 11th hour, the Flyers sold low. Hartman plays with an edge. He's a 2013 first-round pick who can plug into the roster right away, and should sign a reasonable next contract (he's an RFA this summer). But getting only a conditional fourth-rounder (which will be a third if the Preds make it past the first round) isn't great. Simmonds was worth at least a second.
Key additions: D Brendan Guhle, 2019 first-round pick (San Jose's or St. Louis', from Buffalo)
Key subtractions: D Brandon Montour, F Brian Gibbons, D Michael Del Zotto

Montour is the third puck-moving defenseman -- along with Sami Vatanen (Devils) and Shea Theodore (Golden Knights) -- that the Ducks have shipped out in the past two years. The return is solid, as Guhle is younger, cheaper and has some good upside. (The first-rounder is San Jose's pick, or the Ducks have the option to take St. Louis' pick if it's between No. 20 and No. 31.) But while he has had a terrible season on a terrible team, Montour is a fast defender with the potential for greater offensive achievements; the Ducks could never unlock that potential. This one could sting in a few years. Meanwhile, the Ducks are a team that needs to cut much deeper than what they ended up doing at the trade deadline, but those moves will come in the summer.
Key additions: D Erik Gudbranson
Key subtractions: F Tanner Pearson
We thought the Penguins did most of their work well ahead of the deadline. An early-season trade landed Marcus Pettersson, who has been a fine addition on the blue line. Then Nick Bjugstad and Jared McCann arrived in early February. The Pens are going to go all-in as long as Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin are in their prime. So with an injury-depleted roster, GM Jim Rutherford determined the team could use more help. Since Pittsburgh doesn't have a ton more to offer in terms of prospects or picks, that limited the options. Picking up Erik Gudbranson is questionable; he has an iffy track record in Vancouver, and has term left on his deal. Rutherford coveted Gudbranson's physicality, and Pittsburgh has a reputation as a haven for career rehab. Pearson, we hardly knew ye (as a Penguin, that is). He seemed to fall out of favor quickly with coaches.

Key additions: F Mats Zuccarello
Key subtractions: conditional second-round draft pick in 2019, conditional third-round draft pick in 2020
The Blue Jackets and Predators made smart additions, while the Bruins and Penguins misfired. We identify the best and worst around the league.
We grade all the big trades for the 2018-19 season, beginning with the summer moves up through the Feb. 25 deadline.
Stay updated with all the moves completed during the 2018-19 season.

Did Zuccarello look like a great fit in his Dallas debut? Actually, he looked fantastic, plugging in on the Tyler Seguin line for a goal and an assist. Was it the Stars' fault that Zuccarello broke his arm blocking a shot in the second period? No, that's just tough luck. And yet, that's what the deadline is all about: gambles that either pan out or don't. The truth is, Dallas' landscape looks rather bleak. Zuccarello is out for a minimum of four weeks. Despite some push on Monday, they could not make another move after the diagnosis and before the deadline. After several poor drafts, they don't have an impressive prospect pool, and now they don't have their second- and third-round picks in each of the next two drafts. Was it worth it? Ownership will be mulling that as it decides Jim Nill's fate this summer.
Key additions: F Sam Gagner, G Anthony Stolarz
Key subtractions: G Cam Talbot, F Ryan Spooner
The Oilers are obviously going to make significant changes in the offseason, from the general manager down to the coaches on the bench. Perhaps, then, this lack of big moves was a symptom of that uncertainty. Otherwise, there's no good reason why players like Alex Chiasson or Tobias Rieder couldn't have been moved for anything that could help with the retool. (Adjust this grade half a step up or down depending on how you feel about Stolarz, the goalie acquired from the Flyers for Talbot.)

The 2019 NHL trade deadline was like studying for finals back in high school: Hours of procrastination followed by an overwhelming few moments of frantic cramming. Nearly all of the day's biggest moves were made within the last hour of Monday's 3 p.m. ET deadline, while some other significant trades were made in the days leading up to it.
Who won? Who lost? Here are our picks:
As card-carrying members of Team Shoot Your Shot, we applaud the Jackets for keeping Artemi Panarin and Sergei Bobrovsky and adding Ottawa Senators pending free agents Matt Duchene and Ryan Dzingel to go for it this spring. The price for Duchene ends up being steep if they re-sign him -- two first-rounders join two decent prospects -- and two seconds for Dzingel was a high return for Ottawa, probably because Columbus intends to sign the Ohio State product.
And then the Blue Jackets traded fourth- and seventh-round picks in 2019 for defenseman Adam McQuaid, and a 2022 fifth-rounder for goalie Keith Kinkaid. To put it in perspective, there are 14 draft rounds in 2019 and 2020, and the Jackets potentially have five picks in them, and two of those are in the seventh round. But for a franchise that's only heard rumors of a second round in the playoffs, having never seen it in person, the all-in push was the right path for GM Jarmo Kekalainen.
The 2019 NHL draft is June 21-22 in Vancouver, British Columbia. Get ready with the latest prospect rankings and our mock draft.
• Mock Draft 1.0
• Top 50 draft prospects
» More coverage of the NHL draft
Mats Zuccarello was one of the most coveted scoring wingers on the block, and Dallas (29th in the league in goals per game) landed him. Congrats. The Stars didn't need to overpay, either. Even better. And Zuccarello looked terrific for the first period and a half as a Star on Sunday, tallying a goal and an assist against Chicago.
Then he blocked a shot, broke his arm and is out a minimum of four weeks. The deadline is all about gambles, and this one soured quickly. A team with a dearth of prospects is without its second- and third-round picks for each of the next two seasons.
The 26-year-old winger loved being an Ottawa Senator, but ultimately the money (and the team's long-term outlook) necessitated a trade for GM Pierre Dorion. There were several suitors, but few offered Stone a better situation than the Vegas Golden Knights. He reunites with assistant general manager Kelly McCrimmon, who had him in junior with the Brandon Wheat Kings.
He could slide onto the Knights' top line with Jonathan Marchessault and William Karlsson. He joins a franchise that's third in the Pacific after making the Stanley Cup Final in its inaugural season, and a franchise that's the envy of many for its facilities and ownership. Not to mention the biggest lure in Vegas: the jackpot. Stone will sign an eight-year extension worth $9.5 million annually which, considering Nevada's lack of state income tax, will net him significantly more money than anything Ottawa would have given him. A win all around for Stone.
Mark Stone reacts to being traded from Ottawa to Las Vegas, saying that he's ready to get going with the Golden Knights despite some mixed feelings.
Ottawa was cautious in recent games in scratching players who could be on the move, and that includes Cody Ceci. Oh, some teams had surely inquired about Ceci. But nobody wanted him. The defenseman has some of the worst metrics in the league. He could probably benefit from a change of scenery, and a coach who will put him in more favorable situations. Instead, he's stuck toiling away on the worst team in the league.
We grade all the big trades for the 2018-19 season, beginning with the summer moves up through the Feb. 25 deadline.
Filip Forsberg for Martin Erat is the clear modern champ, but some historical swaps were just as bad as that robbery. Here are the top 20.
Mark Stone to Vegas.  Wayne Simmonds to Nashville.  Yes, there were some key moves made before Monday's deadline passed.  Get up to speed, with news, trade target rankings, team needs, grades and more.
The Senators had three high-profile players they wanted to move, and managed to unload them all -- and get a decent return in each case, even in a year when teams were more inclined to hold on to high draft picks. In other words, they're slowly making up for their November 2017 fleecing, in which they questionably agreed to give up their high first-rounder to the Colorado Avalanche in the Matt Duchene deal.
Oh, they still have to give that pick up, but at least they've added a few more first-rounders, second-rounders and an elite prospect in Erik Brannstrom to soften the blow.
This one might be a little controversial, and really depends on how much one admires the skills of Charlie Coyle and Marcus Johansson. The Bruins needed to add a center and a second-line wing. Coyle might end up being better as the latter than the former, and cost them Ryan Donato, who promptly scored an overtime winner for the Wild. Johansson simply doesn't have the same pop as some of the other wingers who moved around the deadline.
The good news for Boston is that its rivals in the East didn't really add much, outside of the Columbus shopping spree. The bad news is that the pieces the Bruins acquired don't necessarily fit snugly.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
At most, the Sharks will trade two second-rounders to the Detroit Red Wings for Gustav Nyquist (if they make the Stanley Cup Final or re-sign him), who has 49 points in 63 games and is having his most productive offensive season since 2013-14. His playoff numbers are a concern, sure, but his acquisition goes a long way to helping San Jose's forward depth and establishing a third scoring option behind the Evander Kane and Joe Pavelski lines.
While it's true that the Penguins needed healthy bodies on the blue line, they traded for one of the worst defensemen (by the numbers) in the NHL in Erik Gudbranson, seeking physicality over effectiveness. It's entirely possible that they've managed to downgrade from Jamie Oleksiak. And Gudbranson is signed through 2021.
You thought Predators GM David Poile would be satisfied having Brian Boyle and Cody McLeod as his only February moves? Yeah, OK. The boldest GM in the league lived up to his reputation, keeping up with other Western Conference contenders like the Jets and Golden Knights by acquiring Mikael Granlund and Wayne Simmonds.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
What's more, the Predators did it for a negligible price. They lost Kevin Fiala, a forward who had sputtered, and Ryan Hartman, a bottom-six forward for whom they overpaid last deadline (at least Poile was able to admit a mistake here). Simmonds should help on the power play and Granlund is a serious upgrade over Fiala, and under contract through next season as well.
What happened to all of those first-round picks who were going to move on the rental market? Just three of them moved unconditionally. As one source said, "This year was really dicey for some reason ... everyone wanted to hang on to their picks."
That was never more evident than on deadline day itself, as the presumably high-ticket rentals like Wayne Simmonds, Derick Brassard and Marcus Johansson all went for less than expected. Kudos to the Senators, Rangers and Red Wings for getting ahead of that market depression and getting value back before the clock struck Monday.
Could the best move be doing nothing at all?
The Tampa Bay Lightning are the best team in hockey. The New York Islanders, Carolina Hurricanes and Calgary Flames are all on the upswing this season. What do the latter three have in common? They all have a new coach who instilled a new system and forged chemistry among players. All three teams had been cited as being players in the market (especially for top-six forwards), but each decided not to pay a high price and instead ride it out with its existing group.
Every Stanley Cup winner since 2010 has made a move during the week preceding the trade deadline, so we'll see if any of these teams can buck the trend. With due respect to Michael Del Zotto, the St. Louis Blues should also be categorized in this group.
The goalie possibilities at this year's deadline felt endless. After all, two-time Vezina Trophy winner Sergei Bobrovsky has been on the block all season. There had been murmurs about Jimmy Howard, Jonathan Quick, Semyon Varlamov, Brian Elliott, Jake Allen and Keith Kinkaid moving as well.
In the end, the only one from that group who ended up moving was Kinkaid, to Columbus -- and the return was laughable. A fifth-round pick ... in 2022. Everyone else is stuck with what they have.
Winnipeg knew its biggest deficiency was at second-line center (again). Paul Stastny plugged in so seamlessly last spring, the Jets tried to sign him in free agency (he chose Vegas instead).
We grade all the big trades for the 2018-19 season, beginning with the summer moves up through the Feb. 25 deadline.
Filip Forsberg for Martin Erat is the clear modern champ, but some historical swaps were just as bad as that robbery. Here are the top 20.
Mark Stone to Vegas.  Wayne Simmonds to Nashville.  Yes, there were some key moves made before Monday's deadline passed.  Get up to speed, with news, trade target rankings, team needs, grades and more.
This year, Winnipeg homed in on the Rangers' Kevin Hayes. Winnipeg gave up only Brendan Lemieux (who was a bottom-six redundancy) and its first-round pick (which should be low) to acquire Hayes. The Jets will also lose a fourth-rounder in 2022 should they win the Stanley Cup, which they'll gladly surrender.
Importantly, the Jets didn't need to part with more prized youngsters, like Jack Roslovic, which might have been a necessity to get Mark Stone. In other words, Hayes was a cheaper but serviceable option. History tends to favor modesty over splash. Winnipeg also added depth pieces -- notably defenseman Nathan Beaulieu, for a cheap price -- to set the pace in the West.
The "conditional pick" is an NHL trade deadline tradition, but some of these conditions were ... a little far-fetched or a little far-flung.
Such as the Mats Zuccarello trade, in which the Rangers get a first if Dallas wins two playoff rounds, which the Stars haven't done in a decade; and a 2020 third-round pick that becomes a first if the Stars re-sign Zuccarello, which they won't. Meanwhile, the Rangers get a fourth-round pick for Kevin Hayes if the Jets win the Stanley Cup ... a fourth-round pick in 2022, that is.
That was actually the second 2022 draft pick traded on deadline day, as the Devils landed one for Keith Kinkaid. Will there even be an NHL in 2022? Who's to say?!

Since becoming majority owner of the Carolina Hurricanes in January 2018, Tom Dundon has been one of the NHL's most unconventional owners. Look no further than the team's choreographed victory celebrations, which have ranged from players competing in "duck, duck, goose" to human bowling.
On Tuesday, Dundon continued down an uncommon path: He invested $250 million to become chairman of the Alliance of American Football, the new eight-team spring pro league that debuted to strong ratings and reviews. The NHL told ESPN that Dundon didn't need its permission to take on the role, nor were they concerned that the financial commitment would adversely affect the Hurricanes.
The ESPN on Ice podcast interviewed Dundon on Tuesday to discuss the AAF, whether he sees an NFL merger or takeover, as well as the state of the Hurricanes and the recent comments by Canadian hockey commentator Don Cherry about the team's victory celebrations, calling them "a bunch of jerks."
ESPN: What inspired you to get involved with the Alliance of American Football?
Tom Dundon: I had seen the deal when they were conceptualizing the league. It wasn't something that I would do, because there were so many questions about the quality of football and all the things that come up when you try to start something new. Once it went on TV, looked great, got good ratings, I talked to people that were supportive of it. At the same time, through mutual acquaintances, I understood they had a need for someone like me to step in. It all came together on Wednesday and Thursday of last week. I wish it was more thought out than that, but it was that simple.
Filip Forsberg for Martin Erat is the clear modern champ, but some historical swaps were just as bad as that robbery. Here are the top 20.
With about four months remaining until the draft, we go from 1 to 31 in the first mock of the year.
Mark Stone to Vegas.  Wayne Simmonds to Nashville.  Yes, there were some key moves made before Monday's deadline passed.  Get up to speed, with news, trade target rankings, team needs, grades and more.
ESPN: There were reports of payroll issues with the league in Week 1. Did your investment directly cover those costs? How does that work, as far as where the money goes?
Dundon: It's a little sloppy to say that on the payroll side. But I provide capital, and they have bills to pay. To directly correlate one to the other might not be right, but I made my investment on Thursday and people get paid on Friday. There were other people the league was talking to and they had other commitments from investors. I can't perfectly say what would have happened if I hadn't [invested], but I know I invested on Thursday.
ESPN: This league has backing from CBS and Charlie Ebersol. It debuted to general favorable reactions, but had some financial trouble early on. What makes the AAF a solid investment?
Dundon: When startups raise capital, that's just how it is. You raise capital, hit certain milestones, you raise more capital. I would say that separating between the committed capital, and whether people were able to fund that capital, and how successful they were in quality of football and the ratings ... they have good players and coaches and good technology. It looked great on TV. I'm actually glad that there was an opportunity that was created for whatever reason, based on how their capital structure was set up.
ESPN: The football was good. It's not like when the XFL debuted and then people immediately started trashing its product. People are excited there's a spring league.
Dundon: And it's growing. It's growing.
ESPN: But to hearken back to other startups in football: You think about the USFL, and one of the goals from some owners was to eventually get absorbed into the NFL. When you get involved with the AAF, do you envision this as an endgame scenario for the league? That perhaps the NFL decides to get into the spring football business and takes the AAF over as a feeder league?
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan talk to Carolina Hurricanes owner Tom Dundon about his recent investment in the AAF (15:20). Plus, Dundon responds to recent criticism from hockey legend Don Cherry regarding the "Storm Surge." With the increased focus on puck and player tracking, Jogmo CEO Martin Bachmayer explains how his company is changing the way the NHL gathers data (37:24). Listen »
Dundon: That wasn't in anything that's crossed my mind. For whatever reason, people love American football. They watch it. There are enough good players -- about 1 percent of college players make it to the NFL. Now, with our league, maybe 2 percent of players get to play. It's viable just to be a support or development area for players whose ultimate goal is to get to the NFL. This league only exists because of the NFL's success. If the NFL had wanted to do it, they had the wherewithal to do it. I don't think about them as someone to buy a league. I think about them this as "let's just create a league, because it was a compelling thing to do."
ESPN: Thirteen months ago, you took majority ownership of the Carolina Hurricanes. Now you're the chairman of a professional football league. What are your other aspirations in sports? Do you want to partner with the NFL one day?
Dundon: I have no idea. I didn't even think about doing this until Wednesday morning. When the next thing comes up, I'll look at it. But my favorite thing to focus on is the Hurricanes. That's enough for me right now.
ESPN: Speaking of the Hurricanes, there are people that are going to see the financial commitment to the AAF and worry about what that means for your investment in the Carolina Hurricanes. Does one correlate with the other at all?
Dundon: No. Zero. I wouldn't do anything that would affect my ability to give us the best chance to win with the Hurricanes. This has no impact, whatsoever.
ESPN: You're obviously someone with a good handle on your time management. We have to imagine you can own the Hurricanes and the AAF at the same time, yes?
Dundon: Obviously, Roddy [coach Rod Brind'Amour] doesn't need my help. Don [Waddell, the general manager] doesn't need my help. I want to help them where I can. A lot of the things we needed to do to set up the Carolina Hurricanes for success, a lot of that has been done, in no small part to who is doing the work now. I have a lot less to worry about when you have Rob Brind'Amour. I trust him so much. I trust him, I trust Don, and I've gotten familiar with many people in the organization and how things work. I spent a lot of time absorbing and understanding, to see what we could do for them to give them the best chance. We're up the learning curve pretty far now. The amount of time I've been spending on it is much less.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
ESPN: We're six days from the NHL trade deadline. The Hurricanes have the longest playoff drought in the NHL. Where do you stand on the state of the team?
Dundon: They've done great. I'm happy for them, because they've all worked so hard. They deserve to have success. I'm hoping, like all our other fans, that it continues. But look: These players are not the reason for the last nine years. The last nine years had nothing to do with these people today. All they can control is today. Everybody is doing the best they can to win the next game. If they do, they do; if they don't, they don't. I'm going to be super frustrated if we lose a game or give up a goal or don't make the playoffs, but it doesn't have much to do with what happened last year or 10 years ago.
ESPN: So what about the trade deadline?
Dundon: It's an interesting time, right? We're in a spot where it can go lots of different ways. We'll take in all the information and make a good decision. We're fully committed to trying to win. Rod's really happy, he's told me repeatedly. He appreciates the effort and the people in the locker room. Right now, I can tell you that he doesn't need anything. He's happy with what he's got. That's our starting point. We'll have conversations in the next week and we'll see where it goes. But I don't think we have a huge incentive to do any one thing right now outside of listening.
ESPN: You have a decision coming up this summer on restricted free agent Sebastian Aho, the 21-year-old who leads your team with 67 points in 59 games. Did your life become easier or harder when the Toronto Maple Leafs signed Auston Matthews, also scheduled to become a restricted free agent, to that five-year extension?
Dundon: [Laughs] I don't really know. I know he's going to play for us. I don't know how we're going to get it done, but we're going to get it done. I think all the other teams are going to run their teams like they're going to run their teams. Whatever they do, they do.
ESPN: Finally, we have to ask about Don Cherry. The "Hockey Night in Canada" commentator has again attacked your team's postgame victory celebrations at home, claiming they're meant to embarrass opponents who aren't even on the ice at the time. When you see the clip of Cherry calling your team "a bunch of jerks," what's going through your mind?
Dundon: I actually enjoyed it. I've listened to a couple of his things. I can't say I'm totally familiar, but I've seen enough where I know that he's good for hockey and entertaining and he cares. I enjoy it. Nobody wants someone to think ill of them. But I'm not malicious, and I know that our players aren't.  I don't think that it's accurate that we're doing it and anyone's harmed. And if I did, we wouldn't do it. I think it's been great. I'm glad he's talking about us. People don't always talk about the Hurricanes, so I hope he keeps talking about us. I'll still listen to him. He gets to say whatever he wants to say.
ESPN: You're selling "Bunch of Jerks" shirts now. You're monetizing that outrage. You are Kevin Bacon and he is the town elders in "Footloose." This has got to be good for business.
Dundon: Anytime someone's talking about you, I think it's good. Look, people were critical of the Whalers Night we had, saying 'Oh, you're just doing it to sell T-shirts.' But let's be honest: You don't make a lot of money selling T-shirts and clothes. That's not how I pay the bills. I'm glad it exists. I'm glad for the opportunity. But it's not about selling the T-shirts. It's about that the people who buy those T-shirts enjoy it. They get to enjoy the Hurricanes and enjoy the sport. We don't have to control what people say about us, we just have to react.

American Alex Rigsby, right, shares a postgame handshake with Canada goalie Shannon Szabados after Sunday's contest.
DETROIT -- The first Rivalry Series -- a three-game exhibition between the U.S. and Canadian women's hockey teams -- could not have started any better for the Americans. Goaltender Alex Rigsby made 33 saves, Hilary Knight scored the lone goal and the U.S. blanked Canada, 1-0 in a sold-out arena in London, Ontario, full of Canadians fans.
But the Americans dropped a high-scoring second game, and by the finale in Detroit, Team USA's flaws were exposed. Defensive lapses meant two early Canadian goals, the transition game struggled and, despite a late push, the U.S. lost 2-0 in the final game.
"The hardest part?" Rigsby said. "You come off a loss and now we have to wait another six weeks until we can play each other again."
The Rivalry Series was all about pushing momentum for the women's game in a non-Olympic year. Yes, it was a precursor to April's IIHF Women's World Championships, but it was also about filling arenas and giving fans even more exposure to one of the fiercest rivalries in sports. The announced attendance in Detroit -- 9,048 -- was the fourth-largest crowd ever for a U.S. women's national team game in the United States.
"It was an amazing three games," U.S. captain Kendall Coyne Schofield said. "To see the support, to see the buildings full, it's been unbelievable."
Shannon Szabados of Canada makes a save on a shot from Team USA's Kendall Coyne Schofield.
The sour taste will motivate the Americans heading into worlds; the U.S. has not lost an international tournament since 2014. But the Rivalry Series also presented this dilemma for Team USA coach Bob Corkum as his team looks to regroup: Does he start goaltender Maddie Rooney, the 21-year-old who dazzled and led the U.S. to Olympic gold, or Rigsby who, over the past three months, has shown she's ready to reclaim the spotlight?
Rigsby is 27 and has already accomplished a ton in her hockey career. In high school, she became the first female to be drafted in the USHL (she never ended up playing for the Chicago Steel, though she did make it far in their training camp). She is the first female goaltender in USA Hockey history to play at the U18, U22 and national team level. She has four world championship gold medals and has competed in six Four Nations Cups. And though she followed legendary goalie Jessie Vetter at Wisconsin, she created her own mark. Rigsby was named team captain for the Badgers -- extremely rare for a goaltender -- and ranks first in school history in career saves and second in career wins.
And yet, her career has been defined by some near-misses. In 2014, she was among the final cuts for the U.S. Olympic team, which won silver. And for the 2018 Olympics, the coaching staff had been coy about which of the three goaltenders would start. Ultimately, it was Rooney who saw the bulk of the action. Though Rigsby won gold with her teammates -- the Americans' first Olympic gold in 20 years -- Rigsby did not see a minute of game action.
"I would assume that she's very motivated to get back into the starting position," said Kristen Hagg, the general manager of Rigsby's CWHL team, the Calgary Inferno. "I'm sure she was thrilled to win a gold medal with that team, but goalies always want to be playing. On the ice and off the ice, she's extremely determined. The way she fights to make saves, you can tell that she has a ton motivating her."
Rigsby's teammates have seen it, too. "From a player that didn't get announced for a minute in the Olympics to a player that has been backstopping this team, she's unbelievable," Coyne Schofield said. "She's always been capable of that, but it's finally amazing to see her get the opportunity."
Brianna Decker is one of the players closest to Rigsby and a teammate on the Calgary squad.



U.S. shuts out Canada behind Rigsby's 33 saves

In praise of Kendall Coyne Schofield

How the Whitecaps are finding success in the NWHL

"Obviously, I play with her in Calgary, and I grew up with her," Decker said. "The commitment she's put toward getting better every day has been very apparent."
Corkum's staff took over just before the Four Nations Cup in November, and the former NHL center gave Rigsby the start in the final game against Canada, over Rooney, in that event. The U.S. won 5-2 behind 23 saves by Rigsby. (Rooney and other college players were not on the roster for the Rivalry Series).
On how she has felt after the Olympics, Rigsby said, "It obviously didn't turn out how anyone could have possibly expected. For me now, we have a new coaching staff that supports me and believes in me, and it makes the world of difference."
This has also been Rigsby's first season playing in the CWHL. In 15 games, she has gone 12-2-0 with a 2.05 GAA and .925 save percentage as Calgary sits in first place in the league and already has clinched a playoff spot.
"She's helped us win games even more than people have realized," Hagg said. "People are focused on our offense, but there has been a lot of times she's been under siege and has made some terrific saves to allow our offense to have a chance."
Like many professional women players, Rigsby has to be a self-starter in a lot of her training. She still lives in Madison, Wisconsin, and flies in to meet her team for games. There have been a few snafus of delays and cancellations, which is expected when traveling in the Midwest during winter, and especially considering there aren't too many direct-flight options from Madison to most Canadian cities.
Rigsby trains with her goalie coach, Larry Clemens. Vetter used to be her training partner but has since retired. Rigsby recently trained with former Badger Ann-Renee Desbiens and thinks they will continue to work together.
"It can be hard," Rigsby says. "But it's good, too, because I can be with my goalie coach and just focus on that, then be with the team for games."
Rigsby said she made "a few mistakes" in the Rivalry Series finale, though the first goal came on a Canadian power play, and the second was on a 2-on-1 break. She won't have too much time to wallow. Calgary's trip to China is this week and most of Rigsby's teammates are already on site. She planned to spend the night in Toronto after the Detroit game, then flying out with Decker and other teammates who played in the series.
Six weeks from now, she could have a chance to start for the U.S. again against Canada.
"Lots of tough decisions," Corkum said of his roster heading into the tournament.
Rigsby is making it even tougher.

DELRAY BEACH, Fla. — A mile off the main drag, in a neighborhood outlined by a single-lane unpaved road and featuring rows of waist-high hedges, a 5,000-square-foot mission-style house is innocuous enough. In the backyard, four men gather in a circle of lawn chairs on the patio. They have just returned from yoga. It’s the middle of summer, and the midday sun beats on their shoulders and glistens off the pool at the center of a manicured lawn. “Sometimes I look around,” says one of the men, “and wonder how I got here. Not necessarily at a place that’s as beautiful as this, but a place where I feel secure.”
This is an addiction treatment center, and these are four of the patients in the 10-bed home. They range from ages 24 to 47, hailing from New Jersey and Western Massachusetts. They all have stories: heroin, alcohol, strained family relationships. Some have been to rehab before—some more than once. “I’ve been at places with 30-40 beds, places that you can just slip under the cracks if you want to,” one of the men says. “And so that’s what I did. It’s not like that here.”
A few feet away, Anthony Fasano looks on and smiles. He is about to enter his 12th season as an NFL tight end, and he is the owner of this facility.
An active NFL player kick-starting a second career isn’t exactly novel. But when Fasano, who has played for the Cowboys, Chiefs, Titans and is about to begin his second stint with the Dolphins, opened Next Chapter Addiction, it raised eyebrows for being unconventional, and risky.
And indeed, it has been a complicated venture for Fasano. His playing career is dwindling (the 33-year-old just signed a one-year deal with Miami). He invested in the facility in part because it could be lucrative. It’s also personal. Fasano’s brother-in-law struggled with addiction and recovery.
“I feel like I went into this for all the right reasons and because I wanted to do things the right way,” Fasano says. “At times I feel like I’m way over my head. But I hope in the end it’s worth it.”

* * *
Southern Florida, specifically Delray Beach—nestled among the retirement communities between Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach—has attracted dozens of addiction treatment facilities over the past decade. There’s a nationwide opioid epidemic, and there’s a race to capitalize on it. According to a 2016 fact sheet by the American Society of Addiction Medicine, the overdose rate in 2008 was nearly four times the 1999 rate and the substance use disorder treatment admission rate in 2009 was six times the 1999 rate.

When Fasano’s brother-in-law was in treatment in South Florida, he often came over to Fasano’s house for dinner. Now recovered, the brother-in-law moved back to Florida permanently in part to distance himself from his previous life in New Jersey. He began working at the center that helped him with recovery. Often he and Fasano discussed the industry. Fasano, who majored in business marketing at Notre Dame and completed the NFL’s Business Management and Entrepreneurial Program at Northwestern in 2012, has done some angel investing over the past eight years. He’d ask questions about the business model and growth opportunities.
“It really piqued my interest, and I thought initially I could invest in their next real estate piece or expansion,” Fasano says. But that facility hit a rough patch.

Meanwhile Abe Antine, a clinical social worker, envisioned creating a facility with a holistic approach to treatment. “I was really unhappy with the facility where I was working,” Antine says, “and thought, If I could just meet the right people who could help facilitate my ideas…”
Antine and Fasano first crossed paths in 2015, through an acquaintance of Fasano’s brother-in-law. Immediately, they clicked. “It’s really serendipity,” Fasano says. “A lot of things came together at a weird juncture really quickly.”
In May 2015, Antine and Fasano became partners. They put together a business plan. They created a code of ethics. They determined that the facility would center around treatment. Though 12-step recovery has been the traditional philosophy for addicts and alcoholics since the 1920s, Antine wanted to have a facility that centered on therapy, looking at issues of childhood, family, emotional abuse and neglect. They would offer separate therapists for family members to help them deal with their own issues. “We wanted intimacy,” Antine says. “Tender love and care put into each patient, to repair negative experiences through positive.”
And so they built a dream facility, a place Fasano says he “would feel comfortable sending family members.” The price tag wasn’t an issue. In the offseason Fasano immersed himself. Next Chapter opened in December 2015, purchasing a five-bedroom home once occupied by a family. They hired 14 full-time staff members, including Fasano’s brother-in-law. Soon, Fasano and Antine realized that building an addiction treatment center—and doing things the right way—takes a lot more than a good idea.
“I’m not going to lie and say it has been easy,” says Fasano. “Going in, I was totally ignorant. I knew nothing about how treatment centers work, let alone the politics. I just wanted to help. I had no idea what I was getting myself into.”
The bills piled up—Fasano has poured seven figures-worth of his own money into the venture and has yet to see a return. Yet, he has pushed on. A second home officially opened last December, two houses away on the same street.

* * *
In describing the early struggles, Fasano says it’s “typical growing pains of early startup stuff.” Though Antine wrote the program, there’s always a tweak; every patient is different. From the business side, Fasano was overwhelmed by the sheer bulk of decisions to be made. For example, Next Chapter is currently on its third billing company.
Some of the decisions Antine believes make their facilities more attractive than competitors aren’t necessarily cost-effective. They don’t want a therapist to have more than five clients at a time. They have separate therapists for patients and parents of patients, spouses and loved ones, something most facilities don’t offer largely because insurance companies with whom they deal with don’t consider it to be a medical necessity for the patient. The second home allows for Next Chapter to offer age-specific groupings (one home is for 18-29 year-olds while the other is for 30+).
“The house is great, the program is great, the product is great,” Antine says. “When we opened, I was very confident this would be an immediate success, but I don’t think I fully understood some of the other treatment centers out there, and the corners they were cutting.”
Though Fasano’s stature as an active NFL player might seem like it would be a draw, he says his largest hurdle has actually been exposure. “The industry is so saturated,” Antine says. “The big fish have so much to spend on advertising, it’s difficult to compete.” Fasano, 17 months in, is still going with what he calls an “old school, grassroots approach,” leaning on relationships and word of mouth.
And by virtue of being new, Fasano and Antine don’t have as many connections with doctors and agencies that send referrals. Last summer, of the five patients occupying the 10-bed home, all of the patients have come through word of mouth. Fasano has attended conferences over the past year to learn about the industry and initiate outreach, and says he will have more time to do that after he retires.
“We’re only 17 months in,” Fasano says. “It’s going to work out in the long run, I know it will. It’s just another thing I’m going to have to work at.”


In October, we were introduced to the Ice Lions, Kenya's only ice hockey team. They play at what is believed to be the only ice rink in East Africa; the sheet at the Panari Hotel is typically used for recreational skating. It's a tad smaller than North American ice and enclosed by square corners.
Due to numbers (and lack of a goaltender), the Ice Lions had nobody to play but themselves. Over the summer, Tim Horton's flew the Ice Lions to Canada, outfitted them in fresh gear and organized a game with NHL superstars Sidney Crosby and Nathan MacKinnon. The video produced, "The Away Game," quickly went viral. In late October, Tim Horton's flew the Ice Lions' captain, Ben Azegere, back to Toronto to watch his first NHL game and reunite with Crosby. When asked what it meant to him at the time, Azegere said, "Anything is possible. And every dream is valid."Editor's PicksThe only women's ice hockey team in KenyaMeet Tasha Otieno, Faith Wambui and Alexcy Wambui. They are part of the Nairobi Ice Lions -- the sole women's hockey squad in Kenya -- and they are fighting for a place in the sport they love.
Meet Tasha Otieno, Faith Wambui and Alexcy Wambui. They are part of the Nairobi Ice Lions -- the sole women's hockey squad in Kenya -- and they are fighting for a place in the sport they love.
It was a heartwarming story underscoring the universal language of sport. It was also an acute reminder of hockey's cost prohibitions and aspirations for inclusivity.
The Ice Lions returned to Kenya, their normal jobs, their normal routines, but not their normal practices. Tim Colby, a Canadian living in Nairobi who serves as the Ice Lions' coach and adviser, noticed something different about the players after their North American exposure.
"The energy level they came back with -- they were flying, throwing their bodies around like crazy," Colby says. "I don't wear equipment when I play, and now I'm telling myself I might need to."
The regular players -- who were resourceful with limited gear, often taping pieces of couch cushions to themselves -- now have donated full CCM sets, perhaps giving them more security. But they still lack what so many established teams take for granted.
When pucks and sticks inevitably get to the face? That's a problem. A few weeks ago, a player sustained a cut; Colby was applying antibiotic cream when he realized he didn't have medical gloves to properly apply it. When you have players at varying levels, checking from behind is a concern. Colby might institute a full face-mask rule. He's also working to send players to a Red Cross training course, or at least some online video training.
There's no defibrillator at the rink, nor a trainer. The hotel has a doctor and nurse on call, but the team is still working out a protocol for how and when to call them. In Kenya, if you have a serious injury, you don't necessarily wait for an ambulance. You get in the car and go yourself. Not everyone is covered by insurance. What hospital do you go to? Who has a credit card? Now Colby and the other team leaders are figuring out procedures. They might require players to have insurance if they get on the ice, and if they can't afford it, they'll work out how to subsidize it.
In 2016, Azegere approached Colby and asked if he would help them establish a program and get them to the next level.
"I was sitting on the bench thinking, 'No f---ing way,'" Colby says. "I knew the amount of administration that it takes. It's not just getting the guys ready on the ice. I tried explaining, every team has more off-ice people than on-ice people."
But Colby, whose day job is with the United Nations Development Programme, couldn't resist. He saw how much hockey meant to these players; many traveled hours just to get to the rink or were spending their last dime to get there. So he said yes. He and a group of four or five meet after they play hockey and go over things. They're getting started and, thanks to the publicity boost with the Tim Horton's campaign, have a better foundation. But there's still much work to be done.
The Ice Lions host two main shinny games a week, plus four different training sessions, partially broken up by age. There's enough donated equipment now for the regular players, but not at the youth level yet. In all, there are about 30 Kenyan regulars who come.
Tim Horton's donated $30,000 Canadian dollars to the Ice Lions, and Alibaba, a Chinese conglomerate, also donated $30,000 (USD). But the program hasn't dipped into that money yet, partially because they can't access it.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
Corporations can't just give individuals money, and the Ice Lions are dealing with the bureaucracy of setting up a federation. They hope to reach affiliate status by the end of 2019 (or maybe sometime in 2020), but in the meantime, they can't set up a bank account.
After the Tim Horton's campaign, there was a huge demand for jerseys. A man in Toronto volunteered to set up a Web page, print them and ship them, all for free. They looked sharp: the same kelly green with red-striped trimming that Crosby & Co. wore in the game, featuring a regal lion holding a hockey stick in the center. They weren't cheap ($169) but sold out immediately. So far, there have been about 300 sold, and the Ice Lions receive $100 for every sale.
That's given them the largest chunk of accessible cash, plus the GoFundMe, which Colby describes as their "financial lifeline." They've raised more than $7,000 on the page, although after an initial surge this fall, momentum has slowed.
"We haven't really spent any of our money yet," Colby says. "And we're about to have to."
The Ice Lions have a wishlist, and topping it is a new skate-sharpening machine (their current one has long been on the fritz). But the first tangible goal is to send a handful of Ice Lions out to Canada for coaching clinics to earn certification. While there, the Kenyans would spend every evening at a youth hockey practice, then study during the day and leave with a first-level coaching certificate. Colby lined up some people who can host as billets, and they have enough money to give per diems.
The big cost is airfare. Because most of the players work and have families, they're also trying to figure out their schedules before they can book. Ultimately, Colby wants to hand everything over to the Kenyans. As someone who specializes in intercultural relations, he understands that for long-term sustainability, the Kenyans "need to own" the coaching aspect.
"I understand that it will take a bit longer for them on the administrative and operational side, which I'm doing a lot of," Colby says. "But I want them to own the coaching for many reasons. In my business, you learn that different cultures have different ways of doing things. It's not like going from IBM to Ford and finding an organization of cultural differences compared to the West. It's much better if they take on all of the coaching, and they take care of everything they can, down to the theories of how to run a practice better to make it more efficient, the progression of drills, how to manage, et cetera. If they own that, it will be much better for them, and much more sustainable."
The buzz around the Ice Lions has been global. A Swiss photojournalist recently visited. A Finnish reporter swung by last week. A visiting tourist from somewhere in the midwestern United States brought three bags of equipment for the female players. A Mississauga (Canada) man who owns a trucking company offered warehouse space in Toronto in which the Ice Lions can store donated equipment before it is shipped over. In March, the Ice Lions will host Slava Fetisov and Mike Richter as part of their version of "The Last Game," an initiative to raise awareness on climate change.
Rick Lipsey, a former Sports Illustrated writer, coaches his son's 10-and-under squirt team in Manhattan. Looking to inspire his players, Lipsey arranged a Skype call between his players and the Ice Lions.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
"They made it clear on the call how hard they work just to get to the rink, and they appreciate just the ability to play hockey," Lipsey says. "I think that really struck some of our players." So the North Park Hockey Squirt Green team wears Kenya Ice Lion stickers on their helmets, and the boys participate in a program where they solicit donations and pledges for the Ice Lions: small things, like a dollar for a goal, or 50 cents for a win. Every dollar counts.
As for the Ice Lions themselves, Colby has seen continued interest. They're seeing more regular practice attendance. After Azegere's last trip to Canada, he brought back goalie equipment. Ice Lions player George Gachara happily volunteered to give it a go in net; after his first few sessions, it turns out, he was a natural. Gachara barely flinched.
Colby usually skates with his family for an hour on Sundays starting at 11 a.m., and he noticed that some Ice Lions players are getting there an hour and a half earlier than their scheduled practice time to set up drills. Colby recently had a breakfast meeting with the GM, and again, even in darkness, saw some players sneaking in ice time.
The hotel has been a great partner, offering more free ice time and space in a storage facility that can be turned into a locker room. But Colby knows they can't abuse the relationship. The rink costs roughly $8,000 USD to operate per month. Some developers have expressed intrigue about building another rink in Nairobi -- it probably would have to be a multipurpose facility -- but as of now, there are no concrete plans.
By this time next year, Colby would like to have a youth team ready to go to a tournament, either in the U.S. or Canada; they've eyed the Bell Capital Cup in Ottawa as a great fit. Colby is also reaching out to players from South Africa, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia to see if they could arrange an African Cup. As of now, it would have to be a 3-on-3 tournament because the ice is so small.
CCM just came through with another 30 full sets of equipment, and the Ice Lions decided it would all go to the youth.
"The older guys, like Ben and them, know this is all about the next generation," Colby says. "Their time in the limelight was in Canada. We'll have some 3-on-3 tournaments here and there, but the big stuff, the international stuff, will all be for the younger guys."
This is just the start. The Ice Lions plan to be around for generations to come.

As a player, Jayna Hefford, 41, needs little introduction. A five-time Olympian (four gold medals, one silver) she retired in 2014 as Canada's second-leading all-time scorer in international competition, trailing only Hayley Wickenheiser. Across three professional leagues, Hefford scored 439 goals in 418 games; in 2016, the Canadian Women's Hockey League determined it would name its Most Outstanding Player Award in her honor.
In November, Hefford became the sixth woman to be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.
Now Hefford is looking to leave her imprint as a hockey executive. In August, she became interim CWHL commissioner, a gig she could take on full time. Hefford has big aspirations to grow the game, and knows the key is likely forming one league. In an interview with ESPN on Ice, Hefford discusses what the one league would ultimately look like (and what level of NHL involvement she'd like to see), impressions from the CWHL's presence in China, the challenges of promoting superstars and when we might see a female general manager or coach in the NHL.
ESPN: What has surprised you about this job?
Jayna Hefford: A lot has surprised me. I was excited about the opportunity to have an impact on the women's game at a high level. Hopefully, keeping the players in mind and knowing how I thought as a player and what I thought I wanted to happen, and where I feel like the game should go. But along with that comes the business side of the game and the political side of things, working through contract negotiations, there's all sorts of aspects to it. We're sending teams to China, and the implications of that, and just the travel that our teams encompass. So I'm learning, but I've got a lot of good people around me that are guiding me through.
Let's start big. Where do you want the game to go?
Hefford: Like most people in the game, we want to be a place where we have one league with all the best players. That's how I felt when I was a player, and it's how I still feel now. So we're working to get there, it's a complicated road, and trying to navigate the right way, and keeping in mind that when we do it, we want to make sure it's a success. So making sure we do it right is really important.
Matthews and the Maple Leafs agreed to a five-year, $58.17 million deal. Here's a look at the teams and players affected.
Scoring leader Nikita Kucherov of the Lightning has charged to the top of the Hart Trophy ranks. Who's ahead for all the major awards?
We grade each team in six areas, identify a class president and student in danger of failing, and issue an overall mark based on preseason expectations.
How important would it be when you create one league that the NHL gets involved?
Hefford: I believe that's a big part of it. I think that the NHL brand can take the game to a level that, without that, it will take a lot longer certainly. From a playing point of view, I know the players want to associate themselves with the league. They have so many resources. It's kind of a no-brainer that if we want to take it to that next level, [the NHL] has to be a part of it.
There are some people who don't like the idea of the NHL getting involved. Some of them are suspicious of the NHL's involvement. What do you say when you hear those fears or criticisms?
Hefford: I think it's a new age. I'm not really worried about gender or the politics or anything. It's just, how do we get the game to a better place? I think they have the resources to do that, they have the brand strength. I don't know what that looks like, whether it's their league, whether it's them being a part of the league, but I think they also will lean on the history of the game and the people that have been involved. I think it will be a collaborative effort to make sure we elevate the game.
Your league has a team in China. What have you learned about the imprint there and what has your relationship been like with the local community?
Hefford: It's been really interesting because last year, before I took the job, I knew it was part of the league, but I didn't necessarily understand the whole relationship. But I think it's pretty incredible what it's providing for hockey in China. I had a chance to be there in September, and the growth of the game there is amazing. It's exponential. Obviously the population, the density there, it's a huge market. We also feel as a league we're helping to grow the game globally. Their involvement with the CWHL is helping their national program, they're trying to get some North American players who have Chinese descent who can eventually be a part of their programs.
There are good intentions for growing the game globally on both sides. It's an opportunity for our players to travel to a place they probably wouldn't otherwise. The North American players that are over there now and the European players are treated very well. They're playing in an NHL-caliber arena over there with great resources associated with it. I think overall it's been a really great experience. It's a pretty cool thing. I don't know if there's any other league -- any sport, any gender -- that spans the distance that our league does, which I think is pretty cool.
What do you hear from players about logistics with the team based in China?
Hefford: It's challenging on some levels, because some of the players in our league work [other jobs]. So what happens with our teams, they go over for one week during the season, so it's a five-day work week, and they play three games when they're there. So it's a commitment on their level because they do have to take time off if they're working full-time jobs. But outside of that, it's an opportunity to play the game in a country maybe you wouldn't have a chance to go to otherwise. I think it's a unique experience for the players.
Considering most players do work, does that limit the players who might sign there?
Hefford: For them, they're there to be professional athletes. They get incorporated into the community. They do a lot of work outside of just playing the game within the league. They actually work for the KRS organization in growing the game. So they have a bigger job than just playing in the league. So from what I understand, it's been a great experience for them.
From a revenue perspective for the league, how vital has that partnership been?
Hefford: It's been a great partner and a financial aid for our league. It allows us to do more things, obviously. But I think also there's that opportunity to grow the game with the reach that they have there. We see our streamed games are reaching 300,000 people. Their attendance, they get 2,500 to 3,000 people a game to all their home games. As much as they're bringing in the revenue, there's also really great things that are coming out of that partnership in terms of growing the game.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
At the NHL All-Star Game, commissioner Gary Bettman talked a bit about the women's game and the potential of one league. What kind of conversations have you had with the NHL when it comes to that issue? Is it an ongoing dialogue? Has it not really happened yet until both leagues come to the table?
Hefford: It's a combination of all those things. We've had ongoing conversations and the one thing I can say about Gary is, everything he's said publicly is what he's said privately. So that's where they stand. They don't really want to get involved as long as there are two leagues that exist. So it's a challenging situation. Especially being an athlete, that level of patience is really challenging. We want everything to happen faster. But I think their interest in the game is a positive thing. We see that as an end goal. And it's like, how do we close that gap and make it happen as soon as possible?
Hockey is the ultimate team sport, but a lot of times hockey players don't feel comfortable getting their own endorsement deals or promoting themselves as individuals. How have you found that to be important for growing the game and building off momentum from big events like the Olympics?
Hefford: I think it's huge for selling the game. One thing, when I came into this role, one of my priorities was to increase the visibility of the players [and] the awareness around the game. I believe that any sport, regardless of gender, is built around its superstars. If we could fault women's hockey in the past, I think it's that we haven't developed enough of those. It was always about one or two players, that's the only people that the fans knew.
I believe we have, just in the CWHL, six to eight legitimate superstars. We have there of them here [at NHL All-Star] weekend in [Renata] Fast and [Rebecca] Johnston, and you see what [Brianna] Decker did [demonstrating at the skills' competition] ... and then you add in the [Natalie] Spooners and the [Hilary] Knights and [Marie-Philip] Poulins and it's on and on. So how do we develop these real superstars? Because that's how you get the fans, I think. That's how they invest, they want to know their story. So we try to do a better job getting them out there, and their faces. A team sport is challenging, and so is hockey where their faces are covered. That's been a priority for us.
Have players been receptive?
Hefford: I think so. Early in the year we did a photo shoot to start off the season and we just did one around our all-star weekend. The players love that stuff. They had a good time, and we have lots of great content now where you see their faces and you see their personalities, and that's what's important for us.
We in the media often get criticized because when we talk about women's hockey, it's usually in the context of the merger, never about the actual leagues. So tell us about the league right now. What are you favorite storylines right now?
Hefford: A huge storyline for us this year was getting Hilary Knight to Montreal, getting Brianna Decker, Kacey Bellamy, Alex Rigsby. Those American players coming to our league was a huge boost for us. The storyline of, we just talked about, how many superstars we have in this league. You go and watch the two top teams right now it would be Montreal and Calgary, and the number of Olympians on the ice is amazing. The China story is always a big story for us.
So we're coming off a really good all-star weekend where the players, I think, really loved that experience. And now we're getting pretty close to the end of the season, the run-up to the Clarkson Cup and the championship. So it's an exciting time of year for us and I think the season is going to play out to be pretty exciting for the fans.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
What's it like being a Hall of Famer?
Hefford: I don't know if it's really settled in. When you first get the call, it's so surreal. Obviously just the excitement of sharing that with people closest to you, and then reflecting back on all the people who played a part in your career is a big part of it. That's been nice to be able to kind of thank those people and appreciate them. Then you get the Hall of Fame weekend, and you can't believe it's there. It's this weekend that's jam-packed with fun, cool things that your friends and family are all a part of. I was excited to have my kids -- they don't really get what's going on -- but I think through that weekend they started to understand a little bit. Even just the idea of them ... we got to ride a limo to the induction and walked on the red carpet. So those are things they won't forget, which is pretty special.
And now, one of the things from that weekend that I realized is, it's this exclusive club, but once you're in it, you never get out. People are instantly your best friends. So you come here [to San Jose, California] and I saw Willie O'Ree this morning down there and we got to reminisce on the weekend, and I got a chance to see Gary [Bettman] earlier. So those relationships are moments that all of us will remember forever, and that's pretty neat.
Did you have any starstruck moments?
Hefford: One moment that was pretty cool ... all the inductees get to have their own parties on the weekend, and that Saturday night I had my party with friends and family and teammates and people that are part of my career. Lanny McDonald came in with the Stanley Cup, and that was something that I had no idea was happening. Then everybody at my party was like, 'Oh my God, the Stanley Cup is here.' Sometimes you think it's not a big deal until it actually happens then you see the impact it has on people. Those are memories I'll always remember.
A woman NHL GM. When is it happening?
Hefford: I think there's some really intelligent -- like hockey IQ -- women, and obviously strong businesswomen. So could it happen now? Yes. Will it happen soon? I hope. I wish I could give you a timeline. I think that's going to be an incredible moment for women, and for hockey. Whoever has the courage to do it first is going to reap a lot of rewards out of it.
I think on the coaching side, again, I think there are a lot of women who could step in now and do that and hopefully we'll see it sooner than later.

Remember that moment of uncertainty back in school when report cards were sent home? That moment when you were sure that you aced a class but wondered if the teacher saw it differently? Or, conversely, that moment when you silently hoped that D you thought you'd have to explain to your parents might, miraculously, become a C instead?
Progress reports are always stressful, but ultimately, they serve as equal parts validation and motivation. So we decided to hand out report cards to all 31 teams as they head down the stretch of the season to the trade deadline. Stats are collected from sites like Corsica, Natural Stat Trick and Hockey Reference.
It's time to separate the honor roll from those headed for detention.
Note: Read through all 31 teams, or click below to skip ahead to your favorite:

Preseason over/under: 102.5
Current points pace: 98
Forwards: B+
Whether or not you believe the line of Patrice Bergeron, Brad Marchand and David Pastrnak is the best line in the NHL, they are the heartbeat of this Bruins team, accounting for 63 of the Bruins' 145 goals as a team. David Krejci has had a fine season as the anchor of a second scoring line, usually with Jake DeBrusk, with 40 points. Sean Kuraly has played well enough to have made Riley Nash a distant memory. But they're going to need some more from their bottom six to overcome the deep contenders in the East, and they're going to need that elusive top-six winger at the deadline to really get the Stanley Cup parade rolling.
Defense: B+
About what you'd expect. Torey Krug has 33 points in 39 games, with 21 of them on the power play. Zdeno Chara is still doing Zdeno Chara things, and his pairing with Charlie McAvoy (when healthy) is solid. Brandon Carlo is good support for Krug, and the Kevan Miller and Matt Grzelcyk pairing isn't bad for what it is.
Goalies: A-
Tuukka Rask worked through some issues this season to find his form, posting a .919 save percentage and an 8.33 goals saved above average. The Bruins have gotten eerily identical numbers from Jaroslav Halak. One of the best tandems in the NHL.
Special teams: B
The Bruins have a lethal power play, second in the NHL at 27.3 percent. Their penalty kill is middling at 16th in the league (80.3 percent). Marchand and Bergeron play on both.
Coach: B+
Bruce Cassidy has the benefit of having a few constants anchoring his lineup as he tries dozens of combinations around them to see what works. But he has done well to keep the ship running during some frustrating injuries.
GM: B+
Don Sweeney had some nice summer additions that have worked well, including Halak and defenseman John Moore. He swung and missed on Rick Nash during the last trade deadline, but one assumes he's going to get another pitch this deadline with guys like Wayne Simmonds and Artemi Panarin potentially on the move.
Class president: David Pastrnak
Pastrnak has taken things to another level this season, with 28 goals in 50 games.
In danger of failing: David Backes
Backes has five goals in 41 games, skating 13:40 per game. He makes $6 million annually through 2022 and was a healthy scratch for the first time in his career this season.

Overall team grade: B+
A very solid foundation for a championship team that still feels like it's a big piece or two away from really making that push.
Preseason over/under: 80.5
Current points pace: 92
Forwards: B
Sometimes as hockey fans, we should all take a step back and ask what we did to deserve such joys as watching Jack Eichel (16-37-53) and Jeff Skinner (31-14-45) coexist on the same line. Whether it's with Sam Reinhart or Jason Pominville, that line has dominated to the tune of a plus-19 in goal differential. And then ... a bit of a drop-off. The duo of Conor Sheary and Casey Mittelstadt has been together for much of the season, with the latter player starting to find his game after a horror show December (two points in 13 games). Kyle Okposo is a veteran hand on different lines, while Evan Rodrigues and Tage Thompson are starting to contribute. Zemgus Girgensons and Johan Larsson have been a decent duo, while Vladimir Sobotka can still win a faceoff.
Defense: C+
Rasmus Dahlin has been overshadowed in the rookie race by Elias Pettersson, which is a shame, because the first overall pick has been strong -- the Sabres have an on-ice save percentage of .937 when he's out there. Zach Bogosian has been a strong partner for him. Rasmus Ristolainen has 31 points and defensive deficiencies. The rest of the blue line has had its struggles.
Goalies: B+
Carter Hutton (.911) and Linus Ullmark (.914) have similar numbers across the board, with Ullmark just a shade better in fewer games (19, to Hutton's 31). It's a little amazing that the Sabres solidified their goaltending position by jettisoning Robin Lehner, who might now be a Vezina Trophy candidate for the Islanders. What a world.
Special teams: B
The Sabres are 22nd in the NHL at 16.8 percent on the power play. Their penalty kill is a bit better at 81.8 percent, good for ninth.
Coach: C+
Phil Housley's front-runner status for the Jack Adams seems years ago, rather than months. He has moved pieces around to try to find the right fit. The Sabres are very much in the hunt, but some of their underlying numbers leave something to be desired.
GM: B+
Jason Botterill brought on Skinner, Hutton and Sheary. He also watched as Patrik Berglund, a key part of the Ryan O'Reilly trade, took his puck and went home.
Class president: Jeff Skinner
Who knew all Jeff Skinner needed was an All-Star center to threaten 50 goals in a contract year?
In danger of failing: Marco Scandella
Scandella was acquired as a puck-moving offensive defenseman. He has nine points in 40 games this season and has been getting rolled at 5-on-5 in shot attempts.

Overall team grade: B
The Sabres aren't that team winning 10 in a row, and they're not that team that lost the next five games after they did. They're a team blessed with a dominant top line that is clearly still building toward contention. Just being in a playoff race will do wonders for Eichel and Dahlin.
Preseason over/under: 75.5
Current points pace: 72
Forwards: B
Dylan Larkin has 48 points in 51 games, working well with Gustav Nyquist (32 assists) and a variety of wingers that has included Tyler Bertuzzi (28 points) and old standby Justin Abdelkader (five goals in 51 games). Andreas Athanasiou is finally putting his blazing speed to good use with his best offensive season, scoring 17 goals and adding 13 assists in 45 games, although his line has been outpossessed 5-on-5. Anthony Mantha is just a tick down from his previous two seasons but has been strong. Old hands Frans Nielsen and Thomas Vanek do what they do, while 19-year-old top prospect Michael Rasmussen has contributed with 13 points in 41 games.
Defense: C+
The Red Wings have tried several combinations of defensemen: Nicklas Jensen, Niklas Kronwall, Danny DeKeyser, Mike Green, Filip Hronek, Jonathan Ericsson, rookie Dennis Cholowski and the currently injured Trevor Daley. Some of these combinations were the result of injuries, while others were out of ineffectiveness. Of the group, Jensen was featured most prominently on the combinations that produced the best results. This is not a coincidence.
Goalies: B+
We are all witnesses to the Jimmy Howard renaissance. The 34-year-old career Wing has a .916 save percentage and a quality starts percentage of .636 in 34 games. He earned his trip to the All-Star Game. Jonathan Bernier was brought in to tandem with Howard, but his .892 save percentage in 20 games wasn't what Detroit bargained for.
Special teams: D+
Detroit has the 25th-best power play in the NHL at 16.2 percent. They have the 23rd-best penalty kill at 77.6 percent. Their special teams are ... not special.
Coach: C+
The success obviously hasn't been there for Jeff Blashill, who will spend what many assume will be his last season in Detroit out of the playoffs again. But the Red Wings play hard, and he has done well in developing some of their young talents.
GM: C
Ken Holland made a bold draft pick in Filip Zadina, who has looked promising in Grand Rapids. He made a strong trade last season when he sent Tomas Tatar to the Golden Knights at the deadline. He has other assets to move this season -- although some of them have trade protection, because, well, it's Ken Holland. Then, we'll all wait to see if he moves on to other opportunities.
Class president: Nicklas Jensen
As mentioned, Jensen has been one of the most underrated players in the NHL this season, posting an expected goals plus/minus of plus-1.79 playing with a variety of defense partners. Will the Red Wings keep him around?
In danger of failing: Luke Glendening
Glendening has 17 points on the season. He also has a minus-156 in shot attempts and a minus-8.13 in expected goals. Woof.

Overall team grade: C
Not as bad as their record, but not good either. But boy, that Jimmy Howard has been good.
Preseason over/under: 94.5
Current points pace: 82
Forwards: B
The Panthers are 15th this season with 152 goals, and over half of them have come from five forwards. Mike Hoffman (23 goals) is on the best goal-scoring pace of his career. Evgenii Dadonov (18) and Aleksander Barkov (17) have been a reliable duo. Frank Vatrano has been a revelation, with 16 goals in 47 games, both career highs. Jonathan Huberdeau leads the team with 49 points in 48 games, with 12 of them coming on goals. (Vincent Trocheck, an offensive dynamo, has 18 points in 21 games due to injury. Nick Bjugstad was limited to 32 games.) Now the bad news: The Panthers are having a rough defensive year, and that includes the forwards, where even the reliable Barkov is a minus-7 in goal differential. And the rest of the forward group has been underwhelming.
Defense: C+
If Keith Yandle and Aaron Ekblad could play the entire game, the Panthers would be fine. They've been great this season, with Ekblad notching 21 points and Yandle tallying 31 with an even goal differential. Mackenzie Weegar and Bogdan Kiselevich have been surprisingly effective, while Mark Pysyk and Mike Matheson have been subpar. Like the forwards, it's a top-heavy group.
Goalies: D
Through 48 games, the Panthers don't have a goalie with a save percentage greater than .900. Roberto Luongo (.896), James Reimer (.897) and Michael Hutchinson (.839) have by far been the team's weakest group. Luongo, 39, is having arguably the worst season in his storied NHL career, with a goals saved above average of minus-8.01.
Special teams: B+
The Panthers have an outstanding power play, third in the league at 26.8 percent. They have a middling penalty kill at 80.6 percent, good for 14th.
Coach: C-
Bob Boughner obviously can't play goal himself, or else he might have tried it by now. The Panthers are 11th in shot attempts but 20th in percentage of scoring chances at 5-on-5. If Florida misses the playoff cut again, Boughner should hire a private eye to keep tabs on Joel Quenneville's whereabouts.
GM: B
Dale Tallon managed to launder Mike Hoffman through San Jose, which has worked out nicely. He also got Edmonton to overpay for Alex Petrovic, which was also addition by subtraction. There's a strong foundation here. Tallon just needs to figure out how to tie it all together, which honestly is an annual struggle.
Class president: Frank Vatrano
Vatrano went from being a low-key deadline pickup last season to someone who might post more goals this season than he has in his career to date.
In danger of failing: Roberto Luongo
We all want Roberto Luongo to win. We all want Roberto Luongo to be a part of this league as long as possible. But this season has been injury-plagued and deleterious to the Panthers, and he turns 40 in April.

Overall team grade: C-
The Panthers have shown some life lately, but it's probably too late to rally for a playoff spot. One of the NHL's biggest disappointments this season.
Preseason over/under: 80.5
Current points pace: 98
Forwards: A-
The Canadiens have gone from 29th in the NHL last season in goals to 14th in 2018-19, and their improved forward group has been a major factor in that. Max Domi (44 points), Tomas Tatar (38 points), Joel Armia (12 points) and rookie Jesperi Kotkaniemi (23 points) all arrived in the offseason. Phillip Danault (33 points) has taken a leap in production, while holdovers like Jonathan Drouin (37 points), Artturi Lehkonen (23 points) and the always delightful Brendan Gallagher (30 points) and Andrew Shaw (24 points) have all been strong this season.
Defense: B
Shea Weber has been fantastic since returning from injury, with 16 points in 27 games and transforming Victor Mete into his new Ryan Suter. Jeff Petry has been paired with both Mike Reilly and Jordie Benn, and neither combo really took off. Brett Kulak has been in the mix, too.
Goalies: B+
Carey Price has a goals saved above average of plus-8.52 this season, which is being celebrated as a return to form for the former Vezina winner. He has a .915 save percentage and a .541 quality-starts percentage in 37 starts. Antti Niemi has been a less-than-stellar backup.
Special teams: C-
It's a good thing Montreal is so dominant at 5-on-5 because its power play is 30th in the NHL (13 percent) and the penalty kill is 19th overall at 79.5 percent.
Coach: A-
Claude Julien probably hasn't gotten the love he deserves yet for this Montreal turnaround -- that's what happens when Barry Trotz sucks all the air out of the room -- but he's working the lines well and has this team playing a tenacious style that has paid off offensively and defensively at even strength. Last season the Canadiens were 13th in percentage of scoring chances at 5-on-5; this season, they're fifth.
GM: B+
Look, to paraphrase Black Widow from "The Avengers," Marc Bergevin has red on his ledger. There are many mistakes he has made and many mistakes that have yet to come to light. (Let's revisit that Carey Price contract in a few years.) But right now, this season, you have to give the man credit for the additions he made up front, which are paying dividends.
Class president: Max Domi
Domi is like a transfer student from Arizona who arrives on the first day of class and ends up valedictorian. His pace has slowed a bit, but 44 points in 51 games is beyond anyone's expectation for him.
In danger of failing: Matthew Peca, Charles Hudon
Neither Peca nor Hudon has managed to surpass each other in competition for a forward spot this season, in the sense that both have been overwhelmed at 5-on-5. In 29 games, Peca has a minus-9.49 in relative Corsi.

Overall team grade: A-
The Canadiens are not out of the woods yet, with the Eastern Conference bubble still featuring the Sabres and Hurricanes trying to pick someone off. But with 61 points in 51 games, the Canadiens look like a playoff team.
Preseason over/under: 69.5
Current points pace: 71
Forwards: B
Mark Stone has 50 points in 50 games. Matt Duchene has 47 points in 41 games. That's the good news. The bad news is that they're both pending free agents, and their contract status could mean their time in Ottawa could be at an end. But what a season they've had so far. Ditto Ryan Dzingel, who is in the last year of his deal and has 20 goals. Beyond these three players, who have played together, it has been a mixed bag for Ottawa. There have been solid contributions from Chris Tierney (32 points), Mikkel Boedker (27 points), Zack Smith (19 points in 41 games) and Bobby Ryan (30 points in 47 games). There has been promise from young players like Colin White (26 points) and Brady Tkachuk (23 points). Also, Magnus Paajarvi was on the team.
Defense: C+
Thomas Chabot has been a revelation this season, with 39 points in 42 games. He has primarily played with Dylan DeMelo in an effective duo (plus-10 goal differential). Less effective? Almost every other pairing. Mark Borowiecki, Maxime Lajoie, Christian Jaros, Ben Harpur and Christian Wolanin have all seen time.
Goalies: C-
The Senators have used five different goalies this season, including Craig Anderson (.906, 3.55) and Anders Nilsson (.931, 2.14 in seven games). Their .898 team save percentage is actually No. 22 in the NHL, but the Senators have the worst goals-against average (3.74).
Special teams: D+
Ottawa is 15th on the power play, at 20.3 percent, and 29th on the penalty kill, at 75.5 percent.
Coach: C-
For a minute earlier this season, it appeared that Guy Boucher would have this Ottawa team defiantly contending in the Eastern Conference. That minute passed officially around the Senators' eight-game losing streak from Dec. 21 through Jan. 9.
GM: C+
Say what you will about Pierre Dorion, but he found a defensive partner for Chabot and a forward who has averaged 17:35 per game from the Erik Karlsson trade, along with a draft-pick bounty. Does that excuse the fact that Colorado owns what might be the first pick overall in the draft from Ottawa, having traded it for Matt Duchene, who might not even re-sign with the Senators? Um, no.
Class president: Mark Stone
Stone is having a tremendous offensive season to go along with (finally) some Selke Trophy buzz in a contract year.
In danger of failing: Cody Ceci
In danger? With yet another possession-disaster season (minus-290 shot attempts, minus-20 in 5-on-5 goal differential), Ceci is repeating the grade at this point.

Overall team grade: D
The Senators are who we thought they were: a bad hockey team with a few outstanding veteran players and some hope for the future. Well, save for that lottery pick they no longer own ...
Preseason over/under: 107.5
Current points pace: 125
Forwards: A
The deepest collection of forwards in the NHL. Nikita Kucherov is chasing an MVP and a scoring title, with 78 points in 49 games. Brayden Point is chasing a massive new contract, with 65 points in 49 games and the growing reputation as the NHL's next great two-way center. Steven Stamkos (57 points in 49 games) is chasing his first Cup. Tyler Johnson, Ondrej Palat, Yanni Gourde, J.T. Miller, Alex Killorn, Anthony Cirelli, Cedric Paquette, what's left of Ryan Callahan ... what an assemblage of talent.
Defense: A-
This defenseman corps might just match the forwards for quality depth. Victor Hedman has entered his "perennially contending for the Norris Trophy" phase of his career. The Bolts have had him with (much maligned) veteran Dan Girardi. Ryan McDonagh has cooled off since a Norris-caliber start, but he has contributed at both ends. Mikhail Sergachev and Braydon Coburn are first and second in shot-attempt plus/minus for the Lightning, while Anton Stralman can play with anyone. Erik Cernak has been used as well.
Goalies: A-
Andrei Vasilevskiy had a .925 save percentage through his first 28 games, which meant a 15.47 goals saved above average. He's a legit Vezina contender. While Louis Domingue can't replace him as a Stanley Cup-caliber goalie, should some injury befall Vasilevskiy, he filled in admirably during the starter's absence in the regular season.
Special teams: A
The Lightning have the NHL's top power play (29.5 percent) and fifth-best penalty kill (83.5 percent).
Coach: A
Jon Cooper had the Lightning on a historic points pace for most of the season and has juggled this roster's many parts expertly. The Jack Adams usually goes to the guy who turns around a bad team rather than the guy who captains the fastest ship in the fleet, but you expect Cooper would be a finalist at this point.
GM: INC
Julien BriseBois took over from Steve Yzerman in September, and in fairness, we're not going to judge the guy for the Slater Koekkoek-for-Jan Rutta trade. But suffice it to say, he helped Yzerman build this roster (and did so with perennial cap acrobatics).
Class president: Brayden Point
Point needed 82 games to score 32 goals and 66 points last season. He scored 30 goals and recorded 65 points in his first 49 games this season. A massive breakout year for the 22-year-old center.
In danger of failing: Anton Stralman
Stralman isn't anywhere close to flunking, but we should note that he's the only player on the current roster for the Lightning that's in negative expected goal differential territory (-1.96 through 31 games in an injury-plagued season).

Overall team grade: A
The best team in the NHL this season through the first 50 games.
Preseason over/under: 106.5
Current points pace: 104
Forwards: A-
The addition of John Tavares (54 points in 49 games) to Mitch Marner's life has been gigantic, as the Leafs winger leads the team with 62 points. Tavares has 30 goals on the season, with a chance to pass his career best of 38. So that's one line. The other line features Auston Matthews (1.23 points per game) and William Nylander, the latter of whom is still trying to find his game after his contract negotiation went deep into the season. So that's two lines. Then there's Nazem Kadri (32 points), who has skated with Patrick Marleau (22 points) this season. Kasperi Kapanen, Andreas Johnsson, Zach Hyman, Connor Brown ... it all adds up to a talented group that Mike Babcock has deployed in waves this season.
Defense: B
So what happens with Morgan Rielly (50 points) now? Does the Norris contender play with the recently acquired Jake Muzzin, whose presence bumps the Leafs up a notch in the report card? Does Ron Hainsey slip down the lineup to where Travis Dermott and Igor Ozhiganov reside? Toronto fan pariah Jake Gardiner and Nikita Zaitsev are the other combination. Muzzin helps, but this group needs another impact player to be at a championship level.
Goalies: A-
Frederik Andersen (.923) has been an incredible last line of defense for the Leafs, with a .676 quality starts percentage and a plus-16.51 goals saved above average. Garret Sparks (.907) is 6-3-1 as a backup.
Special teams: B+
The Leafs are ninth on the power play (22.1 percent) and 12th on the penalty kill (81.1 percent). Could be better; could be worse.
Coach: A-
Babcock has the Leafs playing a strong possession game (ninth in shot-attempt percentage) that helps power a dynamic offense (3.55 goals per game). But the test isn't in the regular season. It's in Babcock winning a playoff round for the first time since Nicklas Lidstrom retired.
GM: A-
Bed sheets or not, Kyle Dubas successfully sold Tavares on coming to the Leafs, got Nylander on the contract he was comfortable with and made a potentially strong trade for Muzzin. There are still further steps in this plan, but it's coming together.
Class president: Mitch Marner
At this rate, Marner is going to pass his career high in points before Valentine's Day. It's going to be a very, very interesting contract tango with Marner and Matthews and Dubas.
In danger of failing: Ron Hainsey
Hainsey is the Leafs' worst player for shot-attempt differential and has a relative expected goals for percentage of minus-5.77.
Overall team grade: A-
The Leafs have an overpowering offense when it's clicking, a goalie who can win them games by himself and a defense that they hope can handle the other beasts of the East. For now, they're just short of an A.

Preseason over/under: 85.5
Current points pace: 89
Forwards: C
Another team carried exclusively by their top line. The Canes have endured some anemic stretches, which might cost them a playoff spot. Acquiring scoring help is an extreme necessity.
Defense: A-
Carolina might have the deepest blue line in the NHL, full stop. They'll likely auction a defenseman off in a trade, for scoring help, though let's laud these guys for allowing the fewest shots per game in the league.
Goalies: C
The Scott Darling situation is unfortunate. Carolina thought it might have a decent backup option in Petr Mrazek, but they lucked out on waivers with Curtis McElhinney, who has put up gratifying performances and a .914 save percentage.
Special teams: C-
Another year of a drab power play (it ranks 23rd in the league). At least there are signs of hope that it can be fixed; in one four-game stretch earlier this month, the Canes scored five power-play goals.
Coach: B
Dealing with limited resources, rookie head coach Rod Brind'Amour has churned a lot out of this group. They're having fun and buying into his up-tempo style. But they still don't look like a playoff team.
GM: B-
There have been some shrewd moves: the Calvin De Haan offseason acquisition, grabbing McElhinney on waivers and the trade to land Nino Niederreiter. There have also been some misses. We hope this team won't be stunted by frugality.
Class president: Sebastian Aho
The third-year forward began the season with a 12-game point streak and never let up; Aho is now at 57 points in 50 games. He is the team's most consistent and exciting forward.
In danger of failing: Scott Darling
It's an unfortunate situation, but there's a chance we'll never see Darling realize his full potential as an NHL starter.

Overall team grade: C+
They're having fun, they're still rocking great Corsi figures and ... they're still not in the playoff picture. There's a lot of potential here, but Carolina isn't quite ready to level up.
Preseason over/under: 97.5
Current points pace: 99
Forwards: B+
The Blue Jackets have blossomed as a top-10 scoring team, and it's not just the Artemi Panarin show. The entire first line has been sensational, with Cam Atkinson (28 goals) and Pierre Luc Dubois (18) pulling weight. The second line is tough to play against, but production trails after that.
Defense: A-
The Blue Jackets are getting production from their defensemen, who control shot share and push the pace of play. The blueliners have been crucial, with the team getting less-than-expected production in net.
Goalies: B
As Sergei Bobrovsky enters contract uncertainty, it hasn't been his best season; he has allowed three or more goals on 20 occasions, sandwiched by some signature strong play. Joonas Korpisalo has emerged as a proficient No. 2.
Special teams: B-
The power play is once again a burden (ranking 27th in the league at the break), but at least the team is addressing it, hiring Martin St. Louis as a consultant. Columbus has a top-10 penalty kill.
Coach: A
John Tortorella gets an A solely for this: The team's two most talented players are mired in dramatic contract situations, something that could derail a locker room. And yet, it hasn't felt like a distraction at all. Kudos to a veteran coach for keeping the group on message.
GM: B-
Jarmo Kekalainen made a good bet on Anthony Duclair and a whiff (so far) on Riley Nash. How he ultimately handles Bobrovsky and Panarin -- the most pressing decisions for any GM this year -- will be the ultimate basis for judgment.
Class president: Cam Atkinson
On pace for 48 goals and 85 points -- which would shatter his previous career bests of 35 goals and 62 points, set in 2016-17 -- Atkinson's offensive surge eases a bit of the anxiety over potentially losing Panarin at the trade deadline.
In danger of failing: Riley Nash
He was the Blue Jackets' only big free-agent acquisition (signed to a three-year, $8.25 million deal to shore up center depth) and hasn't matched the expectations, recording just six points while averaging 10:30 of ice time per game and potentially having a career-worst season in the faceoff circle (43.2 percent).

Overall team grade: B+
It's been a season beset by uncertainty behind the scenes, given the looming free agency of Panarin and Bobrovsky, and yet the Blue Jackets have played distraction-free hockey. Depending on how the trade deadline shakes out, could this be the year they finally win a playoff series?
Preseason over/under: 91.5
Current points pace: 75
Forwards: C+
Taylor Hall's prolonged absence leaves a unit that needs playmakers. Six players have double-digit goal totals, which is promising.
Defense: D+
This defense lacks two things: depth and dominant players. That means the Devils are often playing catch-up; they've allowed the fifth-most goals in the league at 3.37 per game.
Goalies: D+
Rookie MacKenzie Blackwood has shined of late, which helps forgive what the Devils got out of the position at the beginning of the season, which was dreadful. Keith Kinkaid crashed back to Earth, while we might have seen the last of Cory Schneider.
Special teams: B+
If there's a silver lining to this Devils' season, it's the penalty kill, which has been consistently excellent. New Jersey has the second-best mark in the league at 87.4 The power play ranks 18th.
Coach: C+
Coming off the finest season in his career, it's hard to fault John Hynes too much for New Jersey's current state. He wants his team to play more physical; let's see how his team responds.
GM: C+
Rob Shero did nothing to address his defense in the offseason, and the results show. Of course, Shero is in for the long play, and he likely predicted this regression, therefore he isn't giving his team every resource -- just yet.
Class president: Kyle Palmieri
He filled in for Taylor Hall at All-Star Weekend, which was emblematic of his role for the Devils this season. In the absence of the reigning MVP, the 27-year-old Palmieri is carrying the load, on pace for a career-high 39 goals.
In danger of failing: Cory Schneider
The 32-year-old Schneider is on the books for $6 million over the next three seasons, which leaves the Devils in a predicament. He's slow, allows goals in bunches and looks like he might not ever fully recover from hip surgery.

Overall team grade: D
We knew the team would likely take a step back from last season's revelation, but not quite like this. Plagued by poor goaltending and a lack of playmakers, the Devils are biding their time in the rebuild.
Preseason over/under: 82.5
Current points pace: 105
Forwards: B+
The Islanders are able to roll out four lines, independent of matchups. New York has been able to get balanced production, though there are weak spots -- the third line, particularly, has had a few rough patches.
Defense: A
The Islanders were last in goals against at 3.57 per game last season and hit the All-Star break in first this season, at 2.41. Credit is due to goaltending, but also to a refocused bunch led by a healthy Johnny Boychuk and top partner Nick Leddy. Others have stepped up, too; Scott Mayfield and Devon Toews have been delights.
Goalies: A
After detailing past battles with alcoholism and bipolar disorder, the new scenery and structure has worked wonders for Robin Lehner, who at $1.5 million is the league's 46th-highest-paid goaltender. At the break, he led the league in save percentage (.931) with a stingy 2.02 GAA. Thomas Greiss has played terrific as well.
Special teams: D
The Islanders' 5-on-5 numbers are spectacular. Conversely, the power play (ranking 24th at the break) and penalty kill (22nd) are not.
Coach: A
Barry Trotz won the midseason Coach of the Year Award, as voted by the Pro Hockey Writers Association. What he has been able to do with this team -- motivating a buy-in post-John Tavares, creating a defensive structure -- is nothing short of extraordinary.
GM: A-
We were skeptical of Lou Lamoriello this summer. After losing Tavares, it appeared the strategy was to sign every fourth-line forward available. Some of of the patchwork fixes have worked. The goaltending acquisitions have been huge. Signing Trotz was a grand slam.
Class president: Robin Lehner
Lehner's renaissance is the league's most compelling comeback story. His resurgence aligns perfectly with the Islanders' resurgence.
In danger of failing: The power play
The man-advantage unit has been a momentum killer at times. Perhaps a trade-deadline acquisition -- the Islanders could be in on any of the top forwards available -- could add a jolt and reward this group for its strong start.

Overall team grade: A
The Islanders are the most impressive first-half team in the league. There was no pity after losing the franchise center. The once-porous defense and goaltending suddenly are strengths.
Preseason over/under: 75.5
Current points pace: 82
Forwards: C
Mika Zibanejad, Kevin Hayes and Chris Kreider are thriving under new coach David Quinn. Most everyone else is underperforming, with high-profile youngsters -- namely Pavel Buchnevich, Filip Chytil and Lias Andersson, who has been shuttling to the AHL -- taking longer to fit in.
Defense: C-
This eight-man rotation just isn't working. It's a blend of bloated contracts (Kevin Shattenkirk, Marc Staal), streakiness (Brady Skjei) and youngsters who are raw. New York has allowed the sixth-most goals in the league at 5-on-5, and fourth-most shots per game.
Goalies: B
Henrik Lundqvist's win in the Save Streak competition at All-Star weekend was perfectly emblematic of his current role with the Rangers: down to the last chance, still capable of brilliance, ultimately it's inconsequential.
Special teams: C-
The power play hovers around the league average -- Zibanejad has been particularly lethal here, with 16 power-play points -- but the penalty kill ranked 26th entering the All-Star break.
Coach: C+
Taking the job at the cusp of the rebuild? That's no easy task. Quinn is trying to motivate via benchings and is teaching by holding more intensive practices than his predecessor. The results should come eventually, but it's definitely going to be a process.
GM: B-
The letter to fans came out about a year ago outlining the rebuild, and to this point, management has stayed true to the plan. Full marks for that. Even bigger marks if they can recoup value at the deadline.
Class president: Mika Zibanejad
Among veterans, he might be the Rangers' only untouchable forward at the deadline, or at least he should be. The 25-year-old center will likely smash his previous career high of 51 points. As of the break, he was on pace for 75.
In danger of failing: Mats Zuccarello
For most of the first half, the Norwegian fan favorite was mired in a terrible slump. The impending UFA is a good bet to be gone by the trade deadline, and unfortunately, his value is quite low.

Overall team grade: C-
Rebuild commence. The first month was a red herring, and there will be difficult months ahead. As long as the team sticks to the plan, though, this season will be remembered as the roughest in the transition.
Preseason over/under: 97.5
Current points pace: 79
Forwards: C-
The Flyers are 22nd in the league, averaging just 2.82 goals per game. The big free-agent acquisition James van Riemsdyk took a while to get going, while other players the Flyers are depending on -- Nolan Patrick and Jakub Voracek -- have been frustrating.
Defense: C
The team's two most talented defensemen, Shayne Gostisbehere and Ivan Provorov, are having off seasons. There have been bright spots, though. See: Radko Gudas, Robert Hagg. Philadelphia has allowed 3.4 goals per game, fourth-most in the league, but goaltending is partially to blame.
Goalies: D
Hextall was preaching patience, but it's evident Hart is ready to be a star ... now. His recent emergence masks what was becoming a hysterical game of musical chairs for Flyers goalies. The collective struggles nearly cost the team the season.
Special teams: F
The Flyers have the worst power play in the league. They're at risk of finishing below 12.2 percent, which is the franchise-worst mark (set in 1967-68). Philadelphia has the fourth-least-efficient penalty kill in the league.
Coach: INC
Dave Hakstol's message was getting stale with the players, so he got the cut. Now it appears Scott Gordon is giving a jolt, but it's too early to tell if it's sustainable.
GM: INC
Chuck Fletcher inherited a roster in peril. He has threatened seismic moves -- everyone is available, it seems, besides Claude Giroux and Carter Hart -- and he'll be closely scrutinized at the deadline.
Class president: Carter Hart
The numbers are impressive: a .922 save percentage through his first 13 starts. Yes, it's a small sample size, but Hart has given fans a reason to believe and the team something to rally around. He's not a franchise-saver, but it feels like saving this season.
In danger of failing: Every goalie not named Carter Hart
The Flyers have already tied the NHL record for cycling through seven goaltenders in a season. The six used before Hart arrived ranged from unlucky to inept.

Overall team grade: D
The team had high hopes, but expectations spiraled quickly. Coach Hakstol and GM Ron Hextall became quick casualties as new GM Fletcher is forced to salvage the roster.
Preseason over/under: 102.5
Current points pace: 98
Forwards: B+
The Pens score a ton (3.49 goals per game, fifth in the league). No, Evgeni Malkin doesn't look like himself, but he's still at higher than a point-per-game pace. The Pens would like better production from their bottom six, but what team wouldn't?
Defense: B-
The Penguins have managed shorthanded (without Justin Schultz) thanks to Kris Letang's bounce-back season and Marcus Pettersson, who has charmed since being acquired from the Ducks. The team is allowing too many shots, though, nearly 33 per game.
Goalies: B
Matt Murray had concerning play to start the season, but since returning from injury in mid-December he is 10-1-0 with a .944 save percentage. Casey DeSmith is developing quite nicely and has the numbers (.917 save percentage through 28 games) to prove it.
Special teams: A-
Once again, the power play has the ability to be lethal, and the Pens rank sixth in the league (24.8 percent). The penalty kill also ranks sixth in the league (83.3 percent).
Coach: A-
Mike Sullivan is a coach who is constantly making adjustments, and that helped pull the Penguins out of a poor start into a scorching hot December. It doesn't feel like Pittsburgh has hit its full potential just yet.
GM: A-
Jim Rutherford is a GM who is never satisfied. He probably overpaid for Jack Johnson in free agency, but his midseason adjustments -- specifically, swapping Daniel Sprong for Pettersson -- have turned out to be just what the team needed. Does he have another move up his sleeve before the deadline?
Class president: Kris Letang
He hasn't been flawless. But the fact that the team's No. 1 defenseman has returned to form has been pivotal, as he's averaging 26-plus minutes per game, his second-best career average.
In danger of failing: Derick Brassard
Not the best way to go into free agency. Brassard was so coveted as a No. 3 center heading into last season's trade deadline, and he now finds himself expendable and likely to be traded.

Overall team grade: B
It has been a streaky four months for Sidney Crosby & Co. -- from goaltending to winning and losing in bunches -- but the Penguins still lurk in good playoff position and look to hit their stride at the right time.
Preseason over/under: 97.5
Current points pace: 98
Forwards: B
Alex Ovechkin is on another ridiculous tear, and the Capitals can score in bunches; plus, they have the league's fourth-best shooting percentage (11.2). But that's masking some depth issues. Evgeny Kuznetsov, Lars Eller and the third line are underperforming.
Defense: B-
The Caps have had to weather injuries to Christian Djoos and Brooks Orpik, as well as a few lapses by other regulars. Overall, though, it's very similar to last year's group; the promotion of Todd Reirden (who was previously in charge of defense as an assistant) has allowed for stability.
Goalies: B+
Braden Holtby was selected to his fourth-straight All-Star Game and has been solid enough, although we know he is capable of more. New backup Pheonix Copley, meanwhile, has been one of the best surprises, with 10 wins in his first 15 appearances.
Special teams: C
The power play began the season hot (20-for-67 in the first 21 games) but slumped from Dec. 15 on (6-for-52) and now ranks 10th in the league at 21.8 percent. The penalty kill, which ranks 25th, has allowed multiple power-play goals on 10 different occasions.
Coach: B
As a rookie head coach, Reirden has been as even keel as they come. With a veteran roster, there isn't too much space for coaching, although he'll be tested to pull the team out of the midseason funk.
GM: B+
There's not a lot of reason to criticize Brian McClellan. After rightfully keeping the band (mostly) together, he has been able to find depth replacements for defense (Jonas Siegenthaler) and goaltending (Copley) from within.
Class president: Alex Ovechkin
It feels like this team goes as their captain goes, and my, oh my, has the 33-year-old been hot. Ovechkin has more than double the number of goals of any other Capital.
In danger of failing: Andre Burakovsky
In the final campaign of a two-year bridge contract, Burakovsky has not been able to consistently produce as the Caps imagined. He's a trendy name on the trade market and could benefit from a change of scenery.
Overall team grade: B
What's worse than a hangover? A delayed hangover. The Capitals looked like they could fend it off with familiar early-season play but entered a tailspin before the break. Hopefully a week off gets them back on track.

Preseason over/under: 85.5
Current points pace: 72
Forwards: B
This is a class divided. The marquee stars are soaring. Patrick Kane is on pace for a career-high 114 points. Jonathan Toews shrugged off any rust from last season and is on pace for a career-high 35 goals. Alex DeBrincat is the next sure thing. And then ... there's everyone else. Depth is a serious concern.
Defense: D
Have there been some bright spots? Sure. Henri Jokiharju has been a delight, and Erik Gustafsson is an offensive revelation. But Brent Seabrook can still be a liability and -- despite a few corrective moves to clear bad signings -- this feels like a group in transition, waiting for the young prospects to fill in next season.
Goalies: D+
The Blackhawks warmly welcomed back Corey Crawford, but the 34-year-old sustained his second concussion in under a year, and it's unclear when he will return. Cam Ward is a genial guy who can still kick it at age 34, but his $3 million signing is an overpay considering the production (.888 save percentage). Plucky 24-year-old Collin Delia is waiting in the wings.
Special teams: C+
The Blackhawks have the league's worst penalty kill at 74.1 percent. For most of the season, their power play has been just as putrid. They must have enlisted extra tutoring sessions after the coaching change, because since Dec. 23, Chicago actually has the best power play in the league (17-for-41, 41.5 percent).
Coach: INC
He's not the grizzled Hall of Famer he replaced, but Jeremy Colliton is no substitute teacher, either. Having recently turned 34, he has the full vote of confidence from management. We've seen encouraging flashes, but also some stagnant play. We probably won't get our full sense of Colliton as a coach until his first full NHL season.
GM: B-
If we were grading Bowman in the offseason, he'd get a D. But he has been busy this season doing something few GMs do: admitting mistakes. Erasing the Jan Rutta (regrettable) and Brandon Manning (even more regrettable) signings was strong work. Buying in on Dylan Strome is panning out already. Firing Joel Quenneville was bold, but the common theme here is Bowman acting with conviction, a powerful trait.
Class president: Patrick Kane
Despite the Blackhawks' turmoil over the past two seasons, the star winger has been the constant. He's not linemate-dependent; he's producing at a spectacular rate. Unfortunately, it's all going to waste.
In danger of failing: Chris Kunitz
Bowman's Band-Aid signings in the summer weren't terribly inspiring, and unfortunately, Kunitz encapsulates that theme. The 35-year-old has had a forgettable tenure in Chicago and isn't going anywhere given his no-move clause.

Overall team grade: D
We didn't expect much from the Blackhawks after last season's regression. Chicago is wading through an organizational transition, and an early coaching change meant the team had to take a further step back before it could move forward.
Preseason over/under: 89.5
Current points pace: 85
Forwards: B-
First line? Those guys get an A-plus. Higher than an A-plus, if possible. Nathan MacKinnon, Gabriel Landeskog and Mikko Rantanen have accounted for nearly 50 percent of the team's goals. But besides some bright spots, like 33-year-old renaissance man Carl Soderberg, everyone else gets a D.
Defense: C
The defense, which has allowed a ninth-worst 3.22 goals per game, still looks like a work in progress and is prone to serious defensive lapses. They also have a puzzling 1-7 record in overtime.
Goalies: D+
Semyon Varlamov has shown flashes but can't sustain it. Meanwhile, Philipp Grubauer (who many figured would win the starting job eventually) has looked uncomfortable with his new team and doesn't look as good as he did in Washington, albeit in limited appearances.
Special teams: B-
The power play is dynamite (thanks, largely -- you guessed it -- to PP1 and that top trio). The penalty kill is fifth-worst in the league; it doesn't help that the Avalanche have taken the most penalties (206 entering the All-Star break).
Coach: C+
Jared Bednar has been insistent on keeping the top line together, for better or worse. He got into a public shouting match with his star player, MacKinnon, over when to pull the goalie, though both downplayed the incident. It's not easy for Bednar, considering what he has to work with. His true test will be if he can pull this team out of a slide for a playoff return.
GM: B
Joe Sakic didn't do much to this roster this season, preaching patience. The discipline is admirable, but at some point, a shakeup -- even something small -- might be exactly what this team needs to level up.
Class president: Nathan MacKinnon
The No. 1 center is building yet another MVP case. But more than that, MacKinnon is the soul of this team. As he goes, so do the Avs.
In danger of failing: The goaltenders
Look, it's not totally dire. But the uninspired play of Varlamov and Grubbauer, especially of late, could have the Avalanche tumbling out of the playoff picture for good.

Overall team grade: B-
Let's keep things in context. This team is still ahead of schedule. But a warm start has cooled off significantly. An uninspiring supporting cast could cost this team a playoff spot.
Preseason over/under: 94.5
Current points pace: 89
Forwards: C
This should be a fast, high-octane attack, freed from the structured reins of Ken Hitchcock. Instead, this is a lackluster group that can't get it going in the first period (a league-low 23 goals in that frame through 49 games) and ranks 29th in the league in goals per game.
Defense: B
The Stars have been without Stephen Johns for the entire season, and now it appears Marc Methot is done for the season. The rotating cast of blueliners has been something to behold. And yet, defense hasn't been a disaster. Thank the overachievers, like Miro Heiskanen and Taylor Fedun.
Goalies: A
Both Ben Bishop and Anton Khudobin have been stabilizers for this team. Among goalies with at least 20 appearances, Bishop quietly led the Western Conference into the All-Star break with a .921 save percentage.
Special teams: A-
The power play is just OK, but the penalty kill is actually quite good. In fact, the PK -- which ranks seventh in the league -- might be Dallas' top asset, besides goaltending.
Coach: B-
Look, drama and injuries aside, this team is in playoff position. That's a minor miracle considering the highest-paid players are underperforming (though not as badly as the team CEO made it out to be) and the fact that players are adjusting to a completely new scheme yet again. Jim Montgomery told the Dallas Morning News that he lost his way a bit in December, but he seems to have settled in since then.
GM: C-
The Stars whiffed on their big free-agent targets. The Valeri Nichushkin signing was a bust. There have been a few minor tweaks since then, but nothing too inspiring yet. Over the second half of the season, could Jim Nill be fighting for his job?
Class president: Miro Heiskanen
In an otherwise forgettable first half (at least a first half the Stars would like to forget) we'll remember the play of the 19-year-old rookie as exceptional. The Stars were bullish about drafting the Finn at No. 3 in 2017 -- ahead of Elias Pettersson -- and you can understand the justification.
In danger of failing: Valeri Nichushkin
The Stars lured their 2013 first-round pick (No. 10 overall) back from the KHL with a two-year, $5.9 million deal. Nichushkin was supposed to add a scoring punch on the second line. He has yet to record a goal in 37 games. It has been a bust so far.

Overall team grade: B-
The Stars have been a blob of inconsistency, and off-ice drama could have derailed the season. And yet, they're in playoff position. That's a sure sign of resiliency, though there is plenty of room for improvements.
Preseason over/under: 95.5
Current points pace: 90
Forwards: B-
The Wild rank 24th in the league in goals per game. Jason Zucker and Eric Staal have crashed back to Earth, and the first line hasn't been consistent, but the return of a healthy Zach Parise has been crucial. Charlie Coyle is showing slight improvements from his slump, despite toying with positions.
Defense: A-
Losing Matt Dumba in December hurt, but Minnesota's depth has come through, even as GM Paul Fenton picks up some bottom-pair candidates from waivers (guys he's familiar with from his Nashville days). The Wild are among the league's stingiest in terms of shots allowed per game (29.2).
Goalies: B+
Devan Dubnyk is putting together a fine season, especially turning it on of late. The Wild's lone All-Star has a .913 save percentage and a 2.57 GAA -- figures that are improving. Expect him to get a heavy workload down the stretch. Alex Stalock isn't the most dependable backup.
Special teams: A-
The penalty kill ranks third in the league (84.2 percent). Minnesota misses Dumba on the power play (he had 12 power-play points, 6 goals and 6 assists in his first 32 games) but has maintained in his absence, hitting at 20.9 percent, which is above league average.
Coach: B+
Putting together a successful regular season is old hat for veteran Bruce Boudreau. Getting this team over the playoff hump is the real challenge.
GM: B-
Paul Fenton did virtually nothing to the roster he inherited for the first six months on the job. You can't fault that; the team is playoff-ready. Trading Nino Niederreiter was inevitable, and the return (at first glance) was questionable. We have a feeling he has more on the way.
Class president: Zach Parise
Parise has rebounded quite nicely, playing in his first full season since the October 2017 back surgery. In fact, the 34-year-old is arguably playing his best hockey since he was a New Jersey Devil a decade ago.
In danger of failing: Eric Staal
Hey, we didn't expect Staal to set a franchise record for goals. We knew the 42 goals last season were the by-product of a perfect storm: right player, right situation, right time. But his regression -- in his overall play -- is not what he wants entering unrestricted free agency, through which he hopes to cash in and stay with his current club.

Overall team grade: B-
With nearly the same roster as last season, the Wild are about where we expected them to be: sometimes streaky, but poised for a playoff run.
Preseason over/under: 105.5
Current points pace: 101
Forwards: B-
The Preds haven't had a fully healthy roster for long, which makes it hard to judge. But we agree with this assessment from GM David Poile, appearing on ESPN 102.5 The Game last week: "Our first line, we're very confident that that's one of the best lines in the league. But we're not as confident in our second line, and that's because [Kyle] Turris has been out a couple of times this year, and there's been some inconsistencies with some of the other players. I feel confident on the third and fourth lines, whatever we put together."
Defense: A-
Nashville boasts one of the most talented defensive corps in the league. Despite P.K. Subban missing 19 games, this group has shown the ability to play a structured game and shut out other top units when they need to. Entering the All-Star break, they've allowed only 87 goals at 5-on-5, the fourth-best mark in the league.
Goalies: A-
Pekka Rinne, unsurprisingly, looks terrific. Fresh off of signing a two-year extension, his .883 high-danger save percentage is second among all goalies with at least 1,000 minutes entering the All-Star break. Backup Juuse Saros has struggled at times, but there's no reason to fret about the 23-year-old just yet.
Special teams: D
The power play has been brutal, ranking 30th in the league at the break (13.14 percent); even though the Predators have been without key pieces, we're not grading on a curve. The penalty kill is just OK, ranking 16th in the league.
Coach: A-
That the Predators still hover atop the Central Division, wading through a litany of injuries and suspension, is not just a testament to roster construction, but coaching as well. Peter Laviolette has had to juggle lines more than he has liked.
GM: B+
Poile is in maintenance mode now. He has essentially the same roster from last season and has only had to manage call-ups due to injuries. Poile probably made the right decision waiving Anthony Bitetto, who was dispensable as an eighth defenseman. The real test comes at the trade deadline.
Class president: Ryan Johansen
The first line can compete with the best in the NHL when all three linemates are together, and so far this season, Johnasen has been the only constant (thanks to health). The No. 1 center is on pace to match his career high in points (71) and smash his previous high for assists (56).
In danger of failing: Kevin Fiala
His underlying numbers are OK, but the production has not been there for the 22-year-old winger for whom management and fans have high hopes (just seven goals and 21 assists at 5-on-5 in 52 games). Could the impending RFA be dangled in a trade?

Overall team grade: A-
The Predators have weathered a bevy of injuries to big-time players and still find themselves near the top of the Central. They might not win the Presidents' Trophy again this season, but once healthy, they should rack up the wins.
Preseason over/under: 96.5
Current points pace: 82
Forwards: C+
Jaden Schwartz, Brayden Schenn, Alexander Steen and Vladimir Tarasenko are all producing at lower levels than last season, with Schenn especially taking a step back. Newcomer Ryan O'Reilly has delivered for sure, but the early-season malaise especially affected the forward corps.
Defense: C-
The team's best defenseman, Alex Pietrangelo, doesn't look like himself, with more defensive lapses than usual. That sets the tone for the rest of the group, which has been middling, at best.
Goalies: C+
Jordan Binnington was the No. 4 goaltender at camp and emerged as one of the team's true delights. The 25-year-old is keeping the group -- which sent Chad Johnson to waivers and has Jake Allen playing like Jake Allen -- afloat.
Special teams: B-
The power play is serviceable, hitting at just below 20 percent. The penalty kill has looked terrific at times, and at other times has been quite leaky.
Coach: INC
Since Craig Berube took over, the Blues continued their struggles, then began heating up. Overall, their record with Berube is just above .500. GM Doug Armstrong gave him the nod for the rest of the season.
GM: C-
Ryan O'Reilly? Absolute home run addition. David Perron has performed, too. But the rest of the construction feels shaky, and if Armstrong keeps it status quo, the Blues will be just that: a team left yearning for more come spring time.
Class president: Ryan O'Reilly
Not only does O'Reilly, the big summer acquisition, lead the Blues in goals, but he has 15 more points than the next closest St. Louis player. He's a leader setting the tone. He just needs everyone else to follow.
In danger of failing: Doug Armstrong
Armstrong is a GM in crisis. He has threatened to make seismic moves before, but hasn't followed through, and now he has a roster that only shows up on some nights. It's noteworthy his name has already begun to circulate for other GM openings, like Edmonton or Seattle, meaning others in the league don't figure him to stay in this role very long.

Overall team grade: C-
It was a catastrophic start for St. Louis, a team with hefty Cup aspirations. Coach Mike Yeo was the early fall man. The Blues have shaped up since then, but we fear the cuts are already too deep.
Preseason over/under: 106.5
Current points pace: 108
Forwards: A-
The second line has had its woes; things might have turned out differently if Paul Stastny stayed instead of choosing Vegas. As long as the team is committed to keeping Blake Wheeler and Mark Scheifele together, the top line will be among the league's elite.
Defense: B-
Dustin Byfuglien was beginning to put together a Norris Trophy campaign before his lower-body injury on Dec. 29 (he has not played since). The Jets are giving up more quality scoring chances (and goals) than they did last season.
Goalies: B
It has been a step back for Connor Hellebuyck, a breakout star of the 2017-18 season. It has been a giant leap ahead for Laurent Brossoit, a relatively unknown free-agent signing who emerged as one of the league's best backups.
Special teams: B+
The power play can look dynamite at times (and ranks fourth in the league overall), though it had a pedestrian go from Jan. 1 until the All-Star break, hitting on just 17.2 percent of opportunities. The penalty kill appears decent enough.
GM: A-
The Jets' Cup window is wide open. Some of the best players are still on entry-level contracts, the backup goalie turned out to be a diamond in the rough, Scheifele's contract has been exposed as the league's biggest bargain and Wheeler is affordable too -- until his cap hit increases by nearly $3 million next season. Securing a second-line center remains a goal, but overall, this has been solid roster management from Kevin Cheveldayoff & Co.
Coach: B+
Paul Maurice still has to figure out how to get the second line clicking, but he might get some help after the trade deadline. His biggest challenge is getting the offense to strike like it did in December, without sacrificing defensive structure.
Class president: Mark Scheifele
Scheifele plays hard in all situations (and more than a minute more per game than any other Winnipeg forward) and is on pace for more than 100 points. What more could you want from your No. 1 center?
In danger of failing: Jack Roslovic
The 21-year-old is finally getting an expanded role -- he's averaging nearly 14 minutes per game since Jan. 6 -- but he's still not producing, with only two goals on the season and none since Dec. 2.
Overall team grade: A
The Jets entered the season with weighty expectations thanks to last season's results. And they don't seem fazed by any of it. What's more, it feels like they haven't even hit full stride yet.

Preseason over/under: 94.5
Current points pace: 82
Forwards: D
A mushy soufflé of injuries, disappointments and underwhelming returns, the Ducks' forward corps has exactly two players whose points-per-game average is higher this season than in the entirety of last season: Ondrej Kase, who appeared in 30 games before a torn labrum ended his season, and Nick Ritchie, who didn't come to terms on a new contract until Oct. 17. Corey Perry has missed the season. Ryan Getzlaf is the only player with more than 30 points through 51 games. Their younger players weren't ready for prime time.
Defense: C+
Not nearly as disappointing as the forwards, but a mixed bag. Hampus Lindholm and Brandon Montour have been solid, both on the positive side of goals-for percentage at 5-on-5. Cam Fowler (limited to 28 games) and Josh Manson have had down years. Not a single defenseman is positive in possession metrics at 5-on-5 with more than 20 games played, and the Ducks surrender 34.1 shots per game. Which is why ...
Goalies: A
John Gibson's back might finally be breaking after carrying the Ducks for months. But he still has a .619 quality starts percentage and 15.40 goals saved above average in 43 games.
Special teams: C
The Ducks' power play is ranked No. 28 (14.5 percent), and their penalty kill is ranked No. 13 (80.7). That's down from last season, but for Anaheim, what isn't?
Coach: C-
The Ducks have some of the least impressive numbers in the NHL this season, measured by either traditional or advanced stats. Yet while other coaches have been kicked off a cliff by middling teams, GM Bob Murray has stayed loyal to his friend, coach Randy Carlyle.
GM: B-
Murray's grade is bolstered by some shrewd signings -- Kase at $2.6 million with RFA status is just great -- but otherwise he has been moving the deck chairs and protecting a coach who probably has earned a pink slip.
Class president: John Gibson
He has contributed over nine points to the Ducks' total on his own. He's an MVP candidate for most of the season for dragging what's left of the Ducks to playoff contention.
In danger of failing: Josh Manson
What on earth happened here? A minus-152 in shot attempts and a minus-8.08 in expected goals in 5-on-5 over 46 games. He started 2019 with zero points in 10 games. All of these are way off his career averages.

Overall team grade: C
Honestly, we'd love to grade this Ducks team harsher, but the fact remains that in the wacky West, they're still on the wild-card bubble. Gibson carries them to an average mark.
Preseason over/under: 81.5
Current points pace: 82
Forwards: C-
Sigh. It wouldn't be the Coyotes if we weren't talking about what might have been, either due to injury (free-agent signing Michael Grabner, trade pickup Nick Schmaltz and promising Christian Dvorak) or underwhelming results (whither Derek Stepan?). Alex Galchenyuk is actually on the same pace he was with Montreal last season; it's just tough to laud that when Max Domi has 44 points in 51 games for the Habs.
Defense: B-
More injury fun, as Kevin Connauton and Jakob Chychrun missed time and Jason Demers could miss the season. But Oliver Ekman-Larsson and Niklas Hjalmarsson have been fantastic this season. Hjalmarsson has a 52.25 scoring-chances-for percentage, best on the team. He's a rock defensively, as evidenced by starting just 34 percent of his shifts in the offensive zone, and the kind of defensive defenseman any team would covet (like, say, Chicago ... ouch).
Goalies: B+
This almost seems like it should be an incomplete considering that, yet again, an injury to Antti Raanta dramatically altered the Coyotes' season. But Darcy Kuemper (5.07 goals saved above average) has been strong, and Adin Hill has had his moments. Bottom line: The Coyotes are ninth in goals-against average, with 2.82.
Special teams: B+
The Coyotes have the 19th-best power play (18.2 percent) and the best penalty kill (86.9 percent) in the NHL.
Coach: B
Do we blame Rick Tocchet for a team with an 8.5 shooting percentage? We'd rather praise him for keeping the Coyotes in playoff contention despite all of these injuries and an 8.5 shooting percentage.
GM: C+
John Chayka is always going to be cut some slack because of the Coyotes' challenges: monetarily, and that lingering arena mystery. There is also a lot to praise in his moves, including getting Ekman-Larsson locked in an eight-year extension, and a lot to excuse due to injuries. But at some point, the general manager's grade has to reflect his team's ability to make the playoffs, which they haven't since 2012.
Class president: Clayton Keller
Keller leads the team with 35 points in 50 games, a lone offensive high spot for a team that ranks 28th in goals scored this season.
In danger of failing: Josh Archibald
Archibald is a depth forward. He's also a team-worst minus-114 in shot attempts at 5-on-5 and a minus-4.49 in expected goals plus/minus. But he has had other things on his mind.

Overall team grade: B-
Despite all of these offensive deficiencies and massive injuries, the Coyotes remain very much in the wild-card race.
Preseason over/under: 93.5
Current points pace: 114
Forwards: A
Johnny Gaudreau is making a strong bid for the Hart Trophy, with 73 points in his first 51 games, good for a 1.43 points-per-game average. But he's one of four Calgary forwards with better than a point-per-game average: Sean Monahan (1.20), Elias Lindholm (1.14) and Matthew Tkachuk (1.12) are the others. The Flames have contributors throughout their lineup, but the top line and that partnership between Tkachuk and Mikael Backlund are something special.
Defense: A-
Could they use some help on their bottom pairing? Sure. But the top pairings of Mark Giordano and T.J. Brodie, as well as Noah Hanifin and Travis Hamonic, are among the best in the NHL. Giordano and Brodie have a plus-14 goal differential.
Goalies: B+
"Big Save" David Rittich saved the Flames' season. He has a quality starts percentage of .704 in 30 games, with a stellar 8.29 goals saved above average. Mike Smith, in contrast, has a goals saved above average of minus-12.40. Yikes.
Special teams: B
The Flames are eighth on the power play, with a 23.6 percent conversion rate. They're 21st on the penalty kill, with a 79.0 percent rate.
Coach: A-
While Bill Peters has been the beneficiary of some great goaltending from Rittich, he has also sprinkled something on this roster to make it the second-best offensive team in hockey, with a 3.73 goals-for average.
GM: A-
Outside of one misstep (see below), Brad Treliving has constructed a team with championship potential. Peters has been a great fit as coach. He found Rittich. The Dougie Hamilton trade has, in the short term, worked well for Calgary, with Elias Lindholm fitting about as perfectly onto this team as Treliving could have imagined. Best of all? He has so many major pieces on this team locked in through 2022.
Class president: Mark Giordano
Giordano is the current favorite for the Norris Trophy. He's second in points (52 in 41 games) and playing outstanding defense, to the tune of a plus-168 in shot attempts. It's time he graduated into the upper tier of NHL defensemen, because he has been building that case for years.
In danger of failing: James Neal
With five goals in 49 games and a contract that runs through 2023, Neal remains one of the biggest free-agent flops of the past year.

Overall team grade: A
The Flames' journey to the top of the Pacific Division might be unexpected, but it's completely legitimate ... as long as Rittich doesn't turn into a pumpkin. Their offense is good enough that they can hang with anyone.
Preseason over/under: 89.5
Current points pace: 80
Forwards: C
Like everything else in Edmonton he's trying to drag to success by himself, Connor McDavid raises this grade from the failure chasm. His 73 points in 49 games put him on pace for a career-best 1.49 points per game. Leon Draisaitl has 61 points in 50 games, which is outstanding; the caveat being that he has not become the Malkin to McDavid's Crosby, as his metrics take a noticeable dip without McDavid on his line. Ryan Nugent-Hopkins has 46 points in 50 games and is finally getting the recognition for his 200-foot game in that "Hey, maybe don't trade this great young forward, too" kind of way. But outside of Alex Chiasson's remarkable 17 goals, there are more busts than booms up front. Milan Lucic is still getting $6 million per season for 12 points (thus far). Jesse Puljujarvi is still gestating into a consistent NHL player.
Defense: D
Injuries have played a role here, as the Oilers miss Andrej Sekera's competence and really missed Oscar Klefbom's everything during a recent spiral in the standings. The metrics aren't kind to the Oilers who have played this season: While Darnell Nurse has 24 points in 50 games, his expected goals plus/minus at 5-on-5 is a brutal minus-10.44, for example. Adam Larsson has been ordinary, recently fired GM Peter Chiarelli's scrambling acquisitions have underwhelmed and it remains one of the great mysteries of life how Edmonton shipped out so many assets in the past three years without securing a single top-tier, puck-moving defenseman.
Goalies: C-
Mikko Koskinen has been adequate at best, with a .910 save percentage, and in Edmonton, "adequate" gets you a contract extension. Cam Talbot declined for a second straight season, down to a .894 save percentage in 27 games. Overall, this might be the first documented instance of Ken Hitchcock being unable to inflate the numbers of the goalies on a team he's trying to rescue.
Special teams: C+
The Oilers are 11th on the power play at 21.1 percent and 24th on the kill at 77.3 percent. McDavid ranks ninth in power-play points with 23 in 49 games.
Coach: INC
We can't in good faith give a letter grade to either Todd McLellan (9-10-1) or Ken Hitchcock (14-14-2) given their bodies of work, so we'll just say that the former wasn't nearly as bad as indicated and the latter is cooking the best meal he can with the few gourmet ingredients he has in the cupboard.
GM: F
We do, however, have enough of a body of work this season to flunk Chiarelli, who was a rare in-season general manager firing for the Oilers. Even putting aside the slapdash and archaic manner in which he constructed this team, his moves during the season were like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic as it rested at the bottom of the ocean off Newfoundland. And no partial credit for Hitchcock agreeing to work with his old Team Canada cronies.
Class president: Connor McDavid
It's getting to the point where we need to call Seal Team 6 to extract McDavid from this franchise. Failing that, maybe the Oilers steal a wild-card spot so McDavid can win the Hart Trophy.
In danger of failing: Tobias Rieder
Rieder was brought on to bring speedy offense and to kill penalties. He hasn't scored a goal in 36 games, and the penalty kill hasn't exactly been bolstered by the presence of this pending RFA. Another Chiarelli classic.

Overall team grade: C-
Again, it's hard to really throw the Oilers into detention when there's still a chance they can make the playoffs. It just feels like they're a smoldering dumpster fire of mismanagement that has surrounded the best player in the world with mediocrity.
Preseason over/under: 92.5
Current points pace: 72
Forwards: D
What a difference a year makes. Anze Kopitar went from his best offensive season to his worst (0.69 points per game). Jeff Carter, Tyler Toffoli and Adrian Kempe have all underwhelmed, while Dustin Brown and Alex Iafallo at least hit their marks in point production. Ilya Kovalchuk has 22 points in 40 games but has arguably been their worst forward defensively. The Kings' 2.26 goals per game is the worst in the NHL.
Defense: C
The Kings' woeful season even dragged the reliable Drew Doughty down, as he's posting the worst possession numbers of his career thanks mostly to Derek Forbort's bad season. Alec Martinez and the since-traded Jake Muzzin had a steady pairing. Dion Phaneuf has a minus-13 in goal differential in 43 games.
Goalies: C+
It hasn't gotten the spotlight, but the Kings' goaltending has been the best thing about a bad team. Jonathan Quick was limited to 24 games due to injury and has mustered a .904 save percentage with a .542 quality start percentage on a last-place team. Jack Campbell had a .931 save percentage in his 17 games. Even rookie Cal Petersen had a strong run in December.
Special teams: D
The Kings have the 26th-worst power play (15.3) and the 30th-worst penalty kill (74.3) in the league.
Coach: D+
John Stevens got a raw deal, getting fired after 13 games in a panicky move by the Kings. Interim coach Willie Desjardins wasn't able to squeeze much out of this group and has made some baffling decisions during what should be his lone season behind the Kings bench.
GM: C-
Rob Blake fired Stevens too early and helped build a team that's clearly out of sync with where the NHL is in 2019. But the return for Jake Muzzin was strong, and there's still a chance to bring this grade up higher with a few more deadline deals like that.
Class president: Alex Iafallo
Iafallo is one of the few Kings to improve offensively year-over-year and has been the best player on the ice many times this season -- which is good, as he's 25 and it's nice for this team to have some hope for the future.
In danger of failing: Tyler Toffoli
What happened to Tyler Toffoli? He's on track for his worst goal and point production season. He's an unrestricted free agent in 2020, and one wonders if he hasn't played himself out of the Kings' plans.

Overall team grade: F
The worst team in the NHL this season and, without much debate, the most disappointing.
Preseason over/under: 101.5
Current points pace: 103
Forwards: A-
The emergence of Timo Meier, who leads the Sharks in primary points per 60 minutes (at 5-on-5), has bolstered what was already a potent group. Joe Pavelski (27 goals), Tomas Hertl (22), Evander Kane (21) and Logan Couture (19) have all had strong offensive campaigns. Joonas Donskoi has chipped in. And Joe Thornton keeps chugging along, with 25 points in 43 games. The Sharks go three lines deep and aren't overly reliant on any combination to carry them.
Defense: B+
When you look at their average ice times, there's a chance that Brent Burns and/or Erik Karlsson will be on the ice for the Sharks for over three-quarters of the game, which is an advantage few teams enjoy. Burns leads the team with 55 points. Karlsson has been Karlsson since a first-month adjustment period. But the defense's grade gets dragged down a bit by the inexplicable dud season for Marc-Edouard Vlasic, whose pairing with Justin Braun yielded some stunningly bad results until Vlasic's injury in early January. One wonders if a Vlasic/Karlsson duo is what's best for the Sharks (which would pair Braun with Brenden Dillon).
Goalies: C-
Not great, Bob. Martin Jones (.895) and Aaron Dell (.891) have both been underwhelming, with Jones sporting an elephantine minus-13.75 goals saved above average -- by far the Achilles heel of this otherwise championship-caliber group.
Special teams: B+
The Sharks have the No. 9 power play in the NHL at a 24.7 percent conversion rate, as one might expect with Burns and Karlsson back there. They're 10th on the penalty kill (81.3 percent).
Coach: A-
Peter DeBoer's team is blessed with star talent, but he has also shown he knows how to juggle this roster and manage a veteran team.
GM: A-
Doug Wilson has put nearly all the pieces in place for a run at the Stanley Cup. And then the Sharks can worry about the fallout from some of these bold moves, including the future of Erik Karlsson.
Class president: Joe Pavelski
Pavelski is on the best goal-scoring pace of his career, with 27 in 52 games. And hey, would you look at that, his contract is up this summer. What a coincidence.
In danger of failing: Martin Jones
His numbers have fallen off a cliff while the rest of the team around him has improved. He had a nice stretch of games in January before giving up 17 in three games.

Overall team grade: A-
The Sharks are keeping pace with the Flames for the lead in the Pacific Division. This grade would be bumped up if the goaltending was where it should have been this season.
Preseason over/under: 77.5
Current points pace: 84
Forwards: B+
The arrival of Elias Pettersson was a game-changer in every way for Vancouver: a top scorer, a top-six center and a player who can anchor a second scoring line in support of the reliable fireworks of Brock Boeser and Bo Horvat. The rest of the lineup has had players who have chipped in (Jake Virtanen, Nikolay Goldobin, Loui Eriksson and Antoine Roussel) here and there. Bottom line: a tough group to play against, with one absolute star player.
Defense: B
Chris Tanev and Alexander Edler have been a stabilizing force for an inconsistent group, and by that we mean Ben Hutton and Erik Gudbranson have a minus-18 goal differential and a minus-155 in shot attempts together. Derrick Pouliot and Troy Stecher have played above expectations at times.
Goalies: C+
Jacob Markstrom is giving the Canucks about what they expect from him, which is a .622 quality-starts percentage and 10-game stretches in which he's exceptional. Anders Nilsson didn't really work out as a backup. It'll be interesting to see how much action goalie of the future Thatcher Demko gets down the stretch, as that'll really affect their final grade.
Special teams: C
The Canucks' special teams have been in the bottom third of the league, with a power play at No. 21 (16.8) and a penalty kill at No. 20 (79.2).
Coach: A-
Travis Green has made the Canucks the kind of team opponents hate to play against.
GM: B+
Jim Benning continues to make small moves that matter, whether it's bringing in a veteran like Roussel or rescuing Josh Leivo or collecting future assets in sell-offs. It'll be interesting to see what happens with Edler, a pending UFA.
Class president: Elias Pettersson
Pettersson is averaging 3.02 primary points per 60 minutes at 5-on-5, which is just extraordinary. He basically won the Calder Trophy by November.
In danger of failing: Erik Gudbranson
I'll never quite understand how Gudbranson, an underwhelming defender and a perennial black hole for possession, got a three-year extension last February, but here we are.

Overall team grade: B
Pettersson has shifted the trajectory of this franchise in a post-Sedin twins world, and the vibe he has brought to the roster has lifted the Canucks into their role as an unexpected wild-card contender -- warts and all.
Preseason over/under: 101.5
Current points pace: 98
Forwards: B+
The magic of the Jonathan Marchessault (35 points) line last season has faded to the point where he, Reilly Smith (27 points) and William Karlsson (32 points, with 16 goals) have been moved around the lineup a bit. (Their line has been together for over 500 minutes, for a disappointing 44.74 goals-for percentage.) But when they're healthy, this is a strong group for Vegas. Max Pacioretty has 15 goals, and Paul Stastny has 18 points in 22 games. Alex Tuch is having a breakout season, with 40 points to lead the team. And their checking-line duo of Pierre-Edouard Bellemare and Ryan Reaves is a pain to play against.
Defense: B+
Deryk Engelland and Shea Theodore have been strong together, with a plus-123 in shot attempts. Nate Schmidt and Brayden McNabb have been solid offensively, while Colin Miller, Nick Holden and Jon Merrill have had their moments. Overall, the group still lacks one defenseman to tie it all together. You know, that Erik Karlsson type ...
Goalies: A-
Marc-Andre Fleury was recently voted as a midseason Vezina Trophy finalist by the PHWA, which is as reputation-based a vote as you'll find. It's not that he has been bad; with a .911 save percentage and a 3.67 goals saved above average, Fleury has been the Knights' best player during rough stretches. But this isn't the same dominance we saw in the inaugural year of the franchise. Malcolm Subban is 2-5-0 as a backup, while Fleury has played 45 games.
Special teams: B-
The Knights are a disappointing 20th on the power play (17.9), but they're fourth on the penalty kill (83.8).
Coach: A-
As he did last season in winning the Jack Adams, coach Gerard Gallant helped lead Vegas through some rough injury patches and into playoff contention.
GM: B+
George McPhee's aggressive acquisitions of Pacioretty and Stansty are finally paying off now that they're healthy. The depth on this team he built is considerable, but there are still flaws: Losing Schmidt for that PED suspension at the start of the season showed there's a lack of quality puck-movers on his blue line.
Class president: Alex Tuch
Tuch has already surpassed his previous career highs in goals and assists, with 16 tallies and 24 helpers through just 44 games.
In danger of failing: Cody Eakin
No one on the team should be worried about flunking out at this point, but Eakin hasn't had the season at even strength that his numbers (13 goals and 13 assists) might indicate. He's only a plus-2 in shot attempts on a team that's a possession monster otherwise.
Overall team grade: B+
Still a very dangerous contender, with a goaltender who keeps the team competitive nearly every night -- as in, he basically plays every night.

SAN JOSE, Calif. -- The NHL's current collective bargaining agreement expires in September 2022. However, this coming September, both the NHL and NHLPA have the option to exercise an opt-out clause. Over the past few months, leaders from both groups have begun meeting to hash out core issues ahead of that deadline.
NHL commissioner Gary Bettman has repeatedly said the league is "not looking for a fight." That's hopeful, considering the league could be on the verge of its fourth work stoppage in Bettman's 25-year tenure. What does the union think?
ESPN sat down with NHLPA executive director Donald Fehr at All-Star Weekend to discuss the tone of negotiations so far, the new player tracking deal, Olympics, the lack of a domestic violence policy and more.
ESPN: The mantra from Gary Bettman has been that the league is not looking for a fight. Are the players looking for a fight?
Donald Fehr: No. Of course the players are not looking for a fight. The players' view is what it always has been. And what I expressed in the last go-around ad nauseam, is that from the players' standpoint a work stoppage is the last resort you come to. You only do it when that's a better option than the agreements that are on the table. That hasn't been the management practice in a number of sports in the last 35 or 40 years. But hopefully this time will be different. We'll see.
Using a five-category grading system, we determine the teams that are playing must-watch hockey in 2018-19 -- and those you should skip.
From a memorable skills competition Friday night to Saturday night's games, we break down the good, the bad and the Gritty.
We identify the top rentals at all positions and players with term remaining, plus a few long-shot wild cards for good measure.
ESPN: We've also heard that in your meetings so far, there has been a lack of tension, which is noticeably different in tone from previous negotiations. Would you agree with that assessment?
Fehr: Yes. Although ... a win or a loss counts just as much in Game 10 of the season as it does in Game 75. But the tension level might be a bit different. We're closer to Game 10.
ESPN: Escrow is one of the big issues. Bill Daly has mentioned before that there could be some adjustment to the cap that could be done to ease escrow for the players. Is that something the PA is looking at?
Fehr: Obviously escrow is a real problem. We believe that what the teams offer players is a closer measure of their worth. And what the teams offer players [is] less escrow. And that ought to be accounted for. There are obviously a number of things you can do to address it, and I'm sure we'll be talking about it.
ESPN: When we talk to players about the most important issues to them in the next CBA, we usually hear two answers: escrow and the Olympics. Are you confident that an Olympic solution can be achieved in the next CBA?
Fehr: I would like to believe that as far as between us and the NHL, that will not turn out to be a difficult issue. We have a shared desire, if we can figure out how to do it -- and getting from here to there is harder than saying you want to go there -- to develop a long-range international calendar. It's very difficult for me to imagine that would be done without including the Olympics. The reason I said "between us and the NHL" is that we still have to have negotiations with the IOC.
ESPN: So the next potential date for an event is February 2021?
Fehr: February 2021 is the next possible date for the World Cup, yes.
ESPN: When we talk about that potentially being on the table, would the PA only agree if there is a calendar attached to that?
Fehr: There is a generalized tendency to say, 'We're now talking about the international, so we're going to make an agreement on international, this is going to trade for that, you have to have this, and the rest of it." It doesn't work that way. You're looking at an overall agreement. Since we both would like a long-term calendar, I would like to think that will, in part, be a central part of it. Could you do it without it in theory? Sure, in 2016 we did it without it in theory.
It's not the best, because you want to schedule the events, you want to interest the advertisers, you want to build the brand, you want to have a regular recurring event for the fans, you want to do all those kinds of things. So that takes more long-term planning than what we've had a chance to do.
ESPN: It seemed like missing the 2018 Olympics really set things back for the players. Because there was a level of anger on that issue that is palpable. Do you agree?
Fehr: I'll let you make that judgment about anger. But look, whether other people would agree with it or not, or if observers would agree, participation in the Olympics is a meaningful thing for a whole lot of players. The Canadians, particularly so, and for Europeans. Most players look at it and say "OK, the Olympics are coming up, this is either my only chance or maybe my last chance. Because in four years who knows if I'm going to be good enough, if I'm going to be healthy enough, if there's going to be three other young kids who are going to take my place."
So it tended to be viewed as not something we can do again another time, but as an opportunity permanently lost for what a lot of players thought was no good reason. I don't want to get into anger. But if you ask the question differently, do they have memories? The answer is yes.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
ESPN: The NHL is the only of the four North American major professional sports leagues without a domestic violence policy. Do you believe there needs to be one?
Fehr: It depends on what you mean by that. Two things, you could say here we have a domestic violence policy, and we're going to label these things domestic violence and these other things not, and we're going to have hard and fast rules. Or you can say -- and this is what the NHL has done -- if we have inappropriate conduct, wrongful conduct, whether it's domestic violence or it's not, we can evaluate each case on its own merits and then make a judgment as to what needs to be done and third parties can make the judgment as to whether we acted appropriately. That's normally the way discipline works.
So when you say policy, you're talking about some sort of mandatory pre-judged disciplinary proceedings or something like that, as opposed to, do they get the training, do they talk to the people, all the rest of it?
ESPN: Yes.
Fehr: I am old-school. I think we ought to be bright enough to recognize conduct whether or not [there is a written policy]. Now, if over time, you would get a number of matters develop, and you could say, look, you don't have a formal policy and it's actually getting in the way of what you want to do, then you would re-examine it. But I don't think we're there yet. And I think we're lucky enough that the numbers of incidents that we have had are tiny.
ESPN: Do you believe the commissioner has been fair in the discipline he has given out for those incidents?
Fehr: I don't talk about the individual cases. The players have a right to appeal. Everybody ought to have a right to appeal under those circumstances. I will tell you that the discipline, especially in the last case [Predators forward Austin Watson], even after the arbitrator ruled, was very severe. Eighteen games is a long time.
ESPN: Are you worried at all the NHL is going to come after the appeals process because of some of the recent losses it has taken?
Fehr: Do I know whether they are going to come after it? No. Am I bothered by it? No. Do I expect the players would agree to it? Probably not.
ESPN: It's interesting that players agreed not to have any data found from player tracking used in contract negotiations. I would think some data for non-star players -- third-liners, fourth-liners -- could help their cases in these situations. So what was the thinking there?
Fehr: You have to answer this. There are some people that are concerned about making additional information available. Sometimes you hear from people who would say, look, I know what my job is, and if I'm a half second slower than I was two years ago, as long as I'm there when I'm supposed to be, what's the difference? There may be other players who may well have the reaction you do. The critical thing here is, we didn't have agreement on everything, but we got agreements officially to do the experiments and see how it works. Then we'll see what the data is, we'll see if it's helpful in other licensing agreements, we'll see if the broadcasters like it, and we'll see the rest of it.
Then the players, along with their agents and everybody else, can look at it and say in that particular respect, does this make any sense? Should it be tweaked? Should it be reversed? This is short term. These are baby steps.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
ESPN: I understand the players have agreed to license their names as part of that.
Fehr: Again, short term. Nobody knows what this is going to be. Everyone is trying to sort through what it's going to mean. If you ask 10 people what the future stakes of this is going to be in five or 10 years, somebody is going to be right. Because you're going to get an answer from A to Z over 10 people. Nobody really knows. You have to try it and see what it does, what revenue it produces, and see if it has any effects going the other way. All of this is baby steps and experimental, I think.
The notion -- and I think the NHL shares our view on this -- that we feel confident enough to predict what everyone is going to do, and how this is all going to work out, strikes me as something I wouldn't bet on. It's too new.
ESPN: When it comes to medical coverage or benefits for former players, is that something you feel can be achieved in the next CBA?
Fehr: It's something that I'm sure will be explored in some fashion.
ESPN: There has been talk of the league trying to reduce the length of a max contract. Is that something you are concerned about?
Fehr: Concern was on the table in the last agreement, the last go-around. I am of the view that you pretty much ought to leave players and teams alone. Sometimes, depending on your perspective, they'll make good deals and sometimes they'll make bad deals. Sometimes they make deals which are longer and shorter because it structures the financial aspect of it in a certain way. I don't know why you'd want to limit that flexibility.
From a players' standpoint, any time you shorten maximum length of contract, what you do is shorten the`available security a player can get. I suspect you can figure out what their reaction to that would be. But, an agreement is everything that is on the table or people talk about. You really can't isolate them. Would you agree that we're going to play four 20-minute periods? The answer to that is no. What if I pay everybody $10 million a year more, well, maybe I need to think about it then. So we'll see.

SAN JOSE, Calif. -- The 2019 NHL All Star Weekend was about breaking barriers. It was about celebrating a thriving NHL market. It was about embracing new technology and the next wave of stars, but also about nostalgia, boos and roasts. And because Gritty showed up, it was also about everyone's favorite orange menace.
Here's a look back at the weekend that was.
Central Division captain Nathan MacKinnon was a late scratch at All-Star Weekend with a bruised foot. Instead of nixing his spot in the NHL Skills Competition's fastest skater category, the league did something unconventional in naming a replacement -- which turned out to be highly impactful. Kendall Coyne Schofield, one of the speediest players on the U.S. women's national team, took MacKinnon's place and soared.
History was made and barriers were broke. It was such an honor to be the first woman to compete in the @nhl All Star Skills Competition last night. I can't wait to see what the future holds! #NHLAllStar pic.twitter.com/Sc125oBGCx
- Kendall Coyne Schofield (@KendallCoyne) January 26, 2019
It wasn't necessarily about her time (she posted a time of 14.346 seconds, which placed seventh of the eight-skater field) but about the reverberations for female athletes everywhere. "I knew it was a moment that was going to break a lot of barriers and a moment that would change the perception of our game," Coyne Schofield said afterward.
The quote said it all. It's feasible that female players could play in the actual All-Star Game in the not-so-distant future.
The Dallas Stars have had a rough season, OK? They're in a wild-card position as of the break, but they're still adjusting to new coach Jim Montgomery. It's been a month since the teams' CEO went on an expletive-filled rant to call out the team's two star players, but it still feels like they're in damage control mode. One of the few bright spots? Rookie sensation Miro Heiskanen.
But when the 19-year-old got his go on a national stage in the fastest skater competition ... he wiped out like (well, no need to use another expletive here). Heiskanen took a nasty spill on the second turn, splaying out on the ice.
WHY YOU GOTTA SCARE STARS FANS LIKE THIS, MIRO?! #GoStars pic.twitter.com/cn7FXmnKJU
- SportsDay Stars (@dmn_stars) January 26, 2019
Heck, even Connor McDavid -- who perhaps can best relate to Heiskanen as a shining star on an otherwise muddled team -- cringed. "That was a bad fall," McDavid said afterward. "It was really awkward. We were all happy he was OK. Credit to him for going back out there and putting up another pretty good time."
The Premier Passing event was premier in name only. The drill was the filler event of Friday night -- drawn out, dry and completely forgettable -- if not for Brianna Decker.
The U.S. women's national team and CWHL player demonstrated the drill with ease. Too much ease. She appeared to finish in one minute, six seconds, which bested the time of the eventual winner, Leon Draisaitl (1:09) while everyone else stumbled. By Saturday morning, there was a groundswell of support for the 27-year-old Decker. Shouldn't she deserve the $25,000 prize money? Hockey manufacturer CCM certainly thought so. The company announced on Saturday afternoon it would pay Decker $25,000 because they "understand the importance of recognizing female hockey players." That's not an insignificant amount of cash for a player whose salary is a fraction of her NHL counterparts'.
The murmurs began Friday. Did the clock really start on time for Decker's demo? Did she really finish ahead of Draisaitl?
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan react to the Oilers' firing of GM Peter Chiarelli (2:45). Emily caught up with Marty St. Louis, who recently joined the Blue Jackets as a special teams consultant (13:40). Former NHL goaltender and current ESPN Radio New York host Rick DiPietro chimes in on the unexpected success of the Islanders (33:49). And as always, Linda Cohn joins to answer listener questions! Listen »
On Saturday, the NHL, as well as rights holder Sportsnet, looked at the video. It turns out, Decker was a few seconds behind Draisaitl -- but also still ahead of the other seven participants. Because she didn't actually beat Draisaitl, the NHL perhaps felt it didn't need to succumb to public pressure. Instead, the league honored Decker, along with the three other women's players who were part of the skills event, by donating $25,000 in each of their names to charities of their choice.
Yes, the NHL was promoting inclusiveness by inviting the women to participate. No, it didn't owe Decker anything, especially considering she was only there to demonstrate. But the kerfuffle afterward felt unnecessary and avoidable. If it left an unsavory taste, remember the women were there to promote a three-game series between the U.S. and Canada.
So you can support Decker -- as well as Coyne Schofield, Renata Fast and Rebecca Johnston -- by tuning in, and appreciating these elite athletes when they compete in their element.
Auston Matthews, 21, has a close relationship with Toronto Maple Leafs teammate (and father figure) Patrick Marleau, 39. So Matthews decided to honor him in San Jose, where Marleau played 20 years before leaving for Toronto as a free agent. Prior to his turn in the shot accuracy event, Matthews removed his Leafs jersey to reveal one with Marleau's name and number, to the delight of the Sharks fans in the crowd as well as Marleau's former teammates in San Jose.
BAH GAWD THAT'S MARLEAU'S MUSIC! #NHLAllStar #LeafsForever pic.twitter.com/2mPMB8PUfh
- Toronto Maple Leafs (@MapleLeafs) January 26, 2019
"It was pretty cool. Patty means a lot to just about everyone that's come through this organization. It was pretty cool of him to do that," said Sharks captain Joe Pavelski, who took a photo with Matthews and San Jose All-Stars Erik Karlsson and Brent Burns. "Of course, we should have turned [Matthews] around. We just wanted the number on the back."
Last season, Brent Burns competed in the NHL's hardest shot competition. While he looks like a guy who could blast the puck, his top speed was 92.4 mph.
"Nah," Los Angeles Kings defenseman Drew Doughty said of Burns's hardest shot chances, "Burnzy's got a muffin. He takes wristers."
Fast forward a year, and maybe he's got more than a muffin, topping out at 100.6 mph. The problem? He totally missed the net on his first attempt, bumming out the Sharks fans cheering him on.
The Save Streak might have been the most exciting component of the NHL All-Star Skills Competition, thanks in large part to King Henrik. The New York Rangers goalie made 12 straight saves to defeat Tampa Bay Lightning goalie Andrei Vasilevskiy (who had eight).
Lundqvist made his eighth stop on Vasilevskiy's teammate Steven Stamkos, and then won the event in dramatic fashion, making a save on former New York Islanders rival and current Maple Leafs star John Tavares. Outstanding goaltending and a little drama made for a memorable event.
On the other end of the goaltending spectrum was the Ducks goalie, who gave up seven goals (!) on nine shots in the first half of the Pacific Division's NHL All-Star Game against the Central, which they'd lose 10-4. The San Jose fans watching their Sharks All-Stars eliminated by Gibson's goaltending responded by chanting, "Ducks Suck."
Said Gibson after the game: "It is what it is." (You'd figure he'd be used to this shot volume, playing in Anaheim.)
The Metropolitan Division earned just the third penalty shot in All-Star Game history against the Central with 4:09 left in the first half. Columbus Blue Jackets defenseman Seth Jones took the puck and ...
Not Seth Jones' finest moment. #NHLAllStar pic.twitter.com/MM2gGuYZPB
- Clay Imoo (@CanuckClay) January 27, 2019
... Jones forgot to put the "shot" in "penalty shot." But he made up for it later with an absolutely gorgeous pass to set up a Kyle Palmieri goal.
The NHL did another major test of its puck tracking technology with its broadcast partners, and it offered some fairly cool options. Players on the ice were identified by CGI name tag, with real-time stats like time on ice and their speed displayed. The chip inside the puck allowed for the speed of shots and passes to be conveyed instantly.
The players' wearable technology made it possible to draw lines between defenders on the ice, showing exactly how far away they were spaced. As far as a way to collect data, player and puck tracking is going to change the way we compile stats. As a way to display that information, it showed some promise on television.
Here's a look at those player graphics on the live broadcast pic.twitter.com/1bEDYFSeAx
- Pete Blackburn (@PeteBlackburn) January 27, 2019
On Friday, NHL commissioner Gary Bettman said that the infamous "glow puck" would not be returning, despite the shared DNA between the current puck-tracking technology and the tech used to create that glowing monstrosity in the 1990s.
While the All-Star Game broadcasts' puck didn't glow, it did have a distracting black "tail" that was reminiscent of the garish display of the glow puck. It was a bit much.
Holding the NHL All-Star Game in Silicon Valley produced some innovating thinking -- like jerseys literally made from recycled ocean garbage -- and a cheeky emoji motif for many of the weekend's graphics. That included digital cartoon faces rather than player headshots on display during the games.
Those cartoons also ended up in a rather hilarious place: On the targets of the shot accuracy skills competition. So players were literally shooting at the faces of Drew Doughty and Auston Matthews. (Now, imagine how much more successful these players would have been had all the targets featured Brad Marchand ...)
Coming out of the intermission during the skills competition was the single most tedious 20 minutes of NHL All-Star Weekend: the Premier Passer event. On the one hand, it was an exemplary display of true hockey skill. On the other hand, it was a cringe-inducing snore as the NHL's best and brightest struggled to carry the puck through elevated barriers and pass the puck into demonic little mini-nets.
You could replace this event with a three-hour long discussion of escrow, and it would be 150 percent more exciting. Please, no more of the Premier Passer event.
Sharks fans showered the Toronto star with boos all weekend, thanks to his decision last summer to sign a blockbuster free-agent contract with the Maple Leafs after an aggressive courtship by San Jose. You have to love that level of passionate pettiness.
Like last night, John Tavares showered with boos from the San Jose crowd upon introduction. #NHLAllStar #LeafsForever pic.twitter.com/8c8IozDa4Y
- Maple Leafs Hotstove (@LeafsNews) January 27, 2019
"I wasn't really sure what to expect. Obviously, a very proud fan base. They love their Sharks. They always create a great atmosphere, great environment when you come to play here on the road," Tavares told ESPN. "I wasn't the only one [who was booed], so I wasn't lonely."
C'mon, San Jose. Rare is the All-Star Game in which Sidney Crosby participates, and you're going to boo him for, what, depriving the Sharks the Stanley Cup with a Conn Smythe-winning performance three years ago?
"I kind of expected that," said Crosby of the jeers during his MVP presentation. "I watched last night and saw the reaction that [Kris Letang] got."
I'VE DIED AND GONE TO HEAVEN. pic.twitter.com/ctEovn5zj2
- Gritty (@GrittyNHL) January 26, 2019
Gritty did a blazing lap in the fastest skater. Gritty was a goofball in the mascot game. We watched Gritty climb an entire section of the Shark Tank by stepping on the arm rests of chairs.
The Philadelphia Flyers mascot's first All-Star Game was everything we wanted and more, including his parody of the Fiji Water girl on the red carpet before his display of affection for Claude Giroux.

The NHL trade season is underway. Get caught up on the assets, restrictions and potential moves for every team ahead of the Feb. 25 deadline.
Note: Read through all 31 teams, or click below to skip ahead to your favorite:

What to watch: The Bruins have been hoping to address their two nagging needs -- a top-six winger to establish their second line as a force in support of their first unit, as well as a third-line center -- through internal means. But as the deadline approaches, GM Don Sweeney might once again have to look outside the locker room for those solutions, as the Bruins are still searching for consistent secondary scoring.
Wayne Simmonds would seem like an obvious target: The Bruins need a left wing, and he provides a net-front presence and passes the Cam Neely truculence test. He's also an unrestricted free-agent rental. If winger Mark Stone and the Senators are at an end, the Bruins would likely pounce on him. Keep an eye on Mats Zuccarello of the Rangers as well, since Boston and New York have been active trading partners in the past.
To that end, Kevin Hayes would seem to address the B's need for another body in the middle. Brayden Schenn, if he's available from the Blues, could be an option as well, but Hayes has an expiring contract, while Schenn is signed through 2020.
Notes/restrictions:
The Bruins have roughly $3.8 million in cap space, via Cap Friendly.
Boston has all of its draft picks for the next three years, outside of its fourth- and seventh-rounders in 2019. The Bruins traded a first in the Rick Nash deal last deadline. Would Sweeney deal one again? "I don't have a hard and fast rule, but by design I'd be hesitant to be doing it," he told WEEI.com.
Among the Bruins with no-move clauses are David Krejci, Patrice Bergeron, Brad Marchand, David Backes (!) and Zdeno Chara. Defenseman Torey Krug has a limited no-trade clause, submitting eight teams to whom he can't be dealt. Goalie Tuukka Rask has a limited no-trade clause as well, submitting a list of eight teams to whom he can be traded.

Our take: It didn't work out with Nash last season, but the Bruins should find another external solution to their top-six left wing problem at the deadline. Look at what they'll be facing in Tampa Bay, Toronto, Washington and Pittsburgh; secondary scoring is essential in this conference.
One great line doesn't make a Stanley Cup champion -- but it certainly doesn't hurt. We debate the top trios around the league.
The drawback to a muscular posterior? It's tough to find a pair of jeans that will fit. Connor McDavid and other NHL stars chronicle the struggle.
Football is king in the Cotton State, but from Huntsville to Birmingham and, yes, Tuscaloosa, there are many puckheads to be found.
What to watch: OK, so maybe the Sabres didn't bank enough points to guarantee a playoff spot (or, perhaps, that theory was always nonsense).
They're still very much in the postseason hunt, but the focus is clearly on two things going forward: pending unrestricted free agent Jeff Skinner, and whether or not he's going to be on Jack Eichel's wing for the long term. Talks are starting, and the asking price could be $8 million annually. What Skinner wants, and where he decides he wants to take his talents next season, will dictate what GM Jason Botterill does with him at the deadline.
There's going to be pressure, internally and externally, to become buyers this season. The Sabres have cap space and future assets to spend. But they also have a few players -- Vladimir Sobotka and Marco Scandella among them -- who go unrestricted in 2020 and could be flipped a year early.
Notes/restrictions:
The Sabres have their own picks in the next three years, save for their 2019 second-, fourth- and fifth-rounders, and their third- and sixth-rounders in 2020. If the Sharks make the playoffs, they can choose to keep their 2019 first-rounder and give Buffalo their 2020 first-rounder, or hand over their 2019 pick for signing Evander Kane. The Sabres also receive the Sharks' 2019 fourth-round pick, unless San Jose decides to keep it, in which case Buffalo gets a 2020 third-round pick instead. The Blues' first-rounder this season is top-10 protected, and Buffalo gets their 2020 first-round pick instead if they get a top-10 pick. The Sabres also have the Leafs' sixth-round pick in 2019 and the Blues' second-round pick in 2021.
Skinner has a no-move clause. Forwards Kyle Okposo (15-team no-trade list) and Jason Pominville (10-team no-trade list) have limited no-trade clauses.

Our take: Keep taking it slow and steady, and make the big splash in the summer. The Sabres will have cap space, assets and a much better understanding of what parts of their team to keep and what parts to jettison. Oh, and sign Skinner, for Jack's sake.
What to watch: For the third straight year, the Red Wings are sellers at the deadline, and they have some interesting pieces that could be for sale.
Gustav Nyquist is chief among them. The winger has been the second-best forward on the team this season, not coincidentally in a contract year. He has a no-trade clause -- it's Ken Holland, so of course he does -- that could gum up the works for a trade, but there would be a market for him.
Goalie Jimmy Howard has been terrific this season in 31 appearances, and by all accounts the Wings want him back for another tour of duty as he hits free agency this summer. Undoubtedly, teams would kick the tires on Howard if one of them loses their starting goalie, but otherwise how many contenders would ante up to add this kind of goalie to their depth chart?
Defenseman Trevor Daley is on the mend and has a no-trade clause. He's also signed through 2020. But when it comes to veteran depth defensemen, Daley would be a desirable option, especially for those looking to add the proverbial "rings in the room."
It wouldn't be an NHL trade deadline if Thomas Vanek wasn't at least mentioned. The 35-year-old winger, who has played for five teams since 2016, is a free agent this summer. He also has a no-trade clause -- again, it's Ken Holland, so of course he does.
Notes/restrictions:
The Red Wings have nearly a dozen players with trade protection: Nyquist, Justin Abdelkader, Darren Helm, Vanek, Mike Green, Danny DeKeyser and Daley all have no-trade clauses; Frans Nielsen (10 teams), Niklas Kronwall (10 teams) and Jonathan Ericsson (19 teams) all have modified no-trade clauses.
Detroit has all of its draft picks for the next three years, as well as the Islanders' second-rounder and the Sabres' and Coyotes' fifth-rounders in 2019, plus the Golden Knights' third-rounder in 2021.

Our take: Let's hope that someone comes to Ken Holland with the kind of overcompensation that Vegas gave them to rent Tomas Tatar. Otherwise, it's "Lose for Hughes" and hope to make a splash in the summer.
What to watch: It's unclear if this is a garage sale or a fire sale. A garage sale is a sale where you have items that you know have to go, but there's a nostalgic bond, so you're not exactly willing to drop the prices -- and sometimes you slowly move them back into the house. A fire sale ... well, everything must go! And considering where the Panthers are this season, as one of 2018-19's biggest disappointments, one wonders if it'll be the latter.
It's not an easy call, because the Panthers are an attractive team on paper. There are five skaters signed through at least 2022. Jonathan Huberdeau, Aleksander Barkov, Mike Hoffman, Evgenii Dadonov and Keith Yandle have all had solid offensive seasons. Injured Vincent Trocheck is a keeper. So are Aaron Ekblad and Mike Matheson on the back end. And yet, this is a team with 42 points through 45 games.
There are obvious calls at the deadline, like shipping out pending free agent Troy Brouwer for anything. Center Nick Bjugstad is signed through 2021 and really needs a refresh. Defenseman Mark Pysyk is under contract until 2020 and has value.
But will GM Dale Tallon take this opportunity to do something more dramatic (assuming this is Tallon's team going forward)?
Notes/restrictions:
Dadonov and Yandle have full no-move clauses. Hoffman has a list of 10 teams to which he can't be traded. Roberto Luongo has a five-team trade list through his modified no-trade clause.
The Panthers have all of their picks, save for their second- and third-rounders in 2019. They have either the Oilers' or Islanders' third-round pick this year, depending on which one is higher. They also have the Leafs' fifth-rounder in 2020.

Our take: There's no question that injuries and some down seasons are at the root of the Panthers' problems this season. But there are other issues, too, that are probably best solved in the summer, including some difficult conversations about the goaltending.
What to watch: Not only are the Canadiens in a playoff seed, but they're challenging for a divisional playoff spot -- which is nutty, especially when you consider how hot GM Marc Bergevin's seat was last year. But here we are.
And here's where Bergevin is: sitting on a bevy of draft picks with more than $9 million in cap space as Montreal approaches the trade deadline. In theory, the Canadiens should be buyers, as a playoff team and with cornerstones Shea Weber and Carey Price both north of 31. Shoot your shot, right?
But with so many young players on the roster and in the pipeline, not to mention those picks, should the Habs play the long game or swing for the fences? That seems to be where Bergevin is as the deadline approaches.
"I'm always going to be listening to options, but the goal is to build for the future. To give up assets for short-term [value], I'm not going to do it. It would have to be very appealing. If there's a young player available and there's assets that have to go, I get that. But I don't think I'll be in the rental business," Bergevin told The Athletic earlier this month. "If I think it makes sense, I'll do it, but I'm not going to start mortgaging the future because I know what's coming, with the world juniors, who they're going to be asking for, and I'm not moving these kids. So it's going to be a short conversation."
That said, pending restricted free-agent center Joel Arnia and unrestricted free-agent defenseman Jordie Benn could be on the way out, as the Canadiens sell off a few assets.
Notes/restrictions:
Defenseman Jeff Petry has a 15-team no-trade list, while fellow defenseman Karl Alzner had a seven-team list and, alas, no takers. Carey Price has a full no-move clause.
The Habs have all of their picks for the next three years outside of a fifth and a seventh this season. They own the Blue Jackets' second, the Flames' fourth, the Blackhawks' and Oilers' fifths, and the Jets' seventh this year; they own the Jets' fourth-rounder in 2020.

Our take: It doesn't appear that Bergevin has an appetite for rentals or for overpaying for a veteran. But if it's a young star player, it still sounds like he's going to shoot his shot. Ridiculous overpayment for Vladimir Tarasenko, anyone?
What to watch: The contract talks between the Senators and pending unrestricted free-agent forwards Matt Duchene and Mark Stone. Full stop.
OK, not a full, full stop. There's every chance that forwards Ryan Dzingel ($1.8 million and a pending UFA) and Magnus Pääjärvi ($900,000, pending UFA) and defenseman Cody Ceci ($4.3 million, a pending RFA and inexplicably valued by others) could be moved. But what Stone and Duchene decide will shape Ottawa's deadline. Both players would fetch a bounty. Or, both players could be cornerstones for the Senators' rebuild -- provided, you know, they want to stay.
Notes/restrictions:
Forward Bobby Ryan had a modified no-trade clause (10 teams) and a $7.25 million cap hit through 2022, which might as well be a no-move clause. Forward Zack Smith, whose $3.25 million average annual value through 2021 would be desirable, has a 10-team no-trade list; goalie Craig Anderson has a 10-team no-trade list.
The Senators infamously don't own their first-round pick this season (it was moved to Colorado as part of the Duchene trade and their decision to retain the No. 4 overall pick last summer). They also don't have their third- and sixth-rounders in 2019, or their fifth-rounder in 2020. They own either the Sharks' or Panthers' second-rounder in 2019, the Penguins' third-rounder in 2019, the Flames' 2019 seventh-rounder, the Sharks' first-rounder in either 2019 or 2020, and potentially the Sharks' first in 2022, if San Jose makes the Stanley Cup Final this season and re-signs Erik Karlsson. They also have the Sharks' sixth-rounder in 2020 and a conditional sixth-rounder from the Blues.

Our take: For the sake of Senators fans, hopefully they sign both players. Stone is legitimately one of the best two-way forwards in hockey, and Duchene seems motivated and happy in Ottawa.
What to watch: Seeing as how the best team in the NHL this season has been meticulously constructed for the better part of two seasons and has such limited room under the cap ceiling, it's hard to image the Lightning being all that active at the deadline outside of little deals like the recent Slater Koekkoek-for-Jan Rutta swap.
"I'll make a trade if there's one to be made. I don't know what that will be right now," GM Julien BriseBois told NHL.com.
Notes/restrictions:
If the Lightning win the Stanley Cup, that's good news for the Rangers, as their conditional second becomes a first rounder for New York. Other than that, the Lightning own all of their picks for the next three years outside of a fifth-rounder in 2019 that belongs to Chicago as part of the Koekkoek-Rutta deal.
Steven Stamkos and Victor Hedman have no-move clauses and are obviously not headed anywhere. Forwards Ondrej Palat, Tyler Johnson and Alex Killorn have no-trade clauses, while Ryan Callahan (16 teams) has a limited one. Defenseman Dan Girardi has a full no-trade clause, while Ryan McDonagh (10 teams), Anton Stralman (16 teams) and Braydon Coburn (16 teams) have limited no-trade clauses.

Our take: When you're 13 points clear of the next team in the conference with a goal differential of plus-56, there's not much you need to be in the market for at the deadline. But you know BriseBois and senior advisor Steve Yzerman will have their eyes open.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
What to watch: The blue line. It's become an NHL cliché that defense will be the Leafs' undoing in the postseason if they don't upgrade the position, especially on the right side. But solving that issue at the deadline isn't going to be easy. The rental market is underwhelming. The trade market for players with term -- like, say, Alec Martinez from the Kings or Alex Pietrangelo of the Blues or any of the Hurricanes' right-handed shooting defensemen -- will cost the Leafs prospects from a pool that's not all that deep. Defensive prospect Timothy Liljegren has been mentioned as trade bait for an established player.
The Leafs can score with anyone up front, and Frederik Andersen has been simply outstanding as a last line of defense. But their maturation as a Cup contender greatly depends on what lies in between them and who arrives to bolster that group.
Notes/restrictions:
Forwards John Tavares and Patrick Marleau have full no-move clauses. Center Nazem Kadri has a 10-team no-trade list; defenseman Ron Hainsey has a 15-team no-trade list; and Andersen has a 10-team no-trade list.
The Leafs have all of their picks for the next three years, except their sixth-rounder in 2019 and their fifth-rounder in 2020. They have the Blues' fourth-rounder and a conditional seventh-rounder from Dallas in 2019, as well as conditional seventh-rounders from the Oilers and Sharks in 2020.
Our take: If a deal presents itself at the deadline for the impact defenseman (with contract term) that the Leafs need, they should take the leap. The window is open to win now, but the road likely goes through Boston and Tampa. The Leafs need more on the back end to advance out of their division, let alone to win the Stanley Cup.

What to watch: The Hurricanes are on the playoff bubble but possess what so many teams covet: a surplus of capable defensemen. And what do the Canes need? Some scoring help.
That makes Carolina an ideal trade partner for many teams this February. The Canes have long been fielding calls about their d-men. It is believed that Jaccob Slavin is absolutely untouchable. Many teams have inquired about 24-year-old Brett Pesce, but it doesn't seem like Carolina has any desire to move him, either. Justin Faulk (two years remaining on his contract, with $4.83 million annual cap hit) and Dougie Hamilton (three years remaining, $5.75 million cap hit) appear to be the more likely trade candidates; it's not an indictment of their play, but rather they're just the odd men out in a numbers game. Both would be able to drive a high price.
The team could also consider addressing goaltending at the deadline. And despite needing offense, they could be shipping one of their better forwards out. That would be Michael Ferland, who, despite ranking fourth among Carolina players in points, needs a new contract next summer, and it seems that management and his camp are far apart in asking price. Considering how cheap the winger is this season ($1.75 million), a plethora of teams will be interested.
Notes/restrictions:
Carolina has already stockpiled draft picks, with 25 picks over the next three drafts.
Goaltender Scott Darling, currently buried in the minors, has a 15-team no trade list. It's probably moot; there doesn't appear to be a market right now for the struggling netminder.
Both goalies on Carolina's current roster, Curtis McElhinney and Petr Mrazek, become unrestricted free agents this summer. Parma, Ohio, native Alex Nedeljkovic was the No. 37 overall pick in 2014 and has played 29 games for the AHL affiliate Charlotte Checkers, generating a 2.63 goals-against average and .905 save percentage.
Jordan Staal has a no-movement clause, and Justin Williams has a 15-team no-trade list.
Faulk is a likely trade candidate but gets some say in where he goes, with a 15-team no-trade list.
Carolina has been operating on a budget and has a boatload of cap space.

Our take: We appreciate the patient approach, but something needs to get done for this team to level up. The goaltending might be able to manage for the rest of the season, but this team won't make it far without scoring help. Move off one of the defensemen, trade away Ferland, but make sure there are solid roster players in return and not just a stockpile of draft picks. Adding Nino Niederreiter for Victor Rask is a good start.
What to watch: It's all about two big names for the Blue Jackets: Artemi Panarin and Sergei Bobrovsky. The two star players have expiring contracts, and their futures in Columbus are dubious.
Let's start with Bobrovsky, who is more likely to be traded. The two time Vezina Trophy winner is 30 and still has plenty in his tank. That's why he's looking for a long-term contract. His camp and Columbus were far away in initial talks, and the relationship has appeared to sour since then. Somebody is going to pay Bobrovsky this summer, and at this point, we'd be shocked if it's the Blue Jackets. Because of that, GM Jarmo Kekalainen may be tempted to recoup value now, even while the team is in the playoff hunt.
The team badly wants Panarin to re-sign, but he seems to want to test the open market (even if that might mean signing back in Columbus eventually). That makes his situation trickier. The Blue Jackets would like a commitment from Panarin around the All-Star weekend, and it's unclear if they're going to get it. They could keep him around as their own rental and hope he reconsiders. Or they could trade him; there's little precedent for a team sending away their best offensive player while still high in the playoff mix.
Columbus might look for other upgrades, like secondary scoring; Sonny Milano and Ryan Murray also have trade-chip potential.
Notes/restrictions:
Bobrovsky has a no-movement clause, but it seems likely that he would be willing to waive it (especially since it would be to a contender) considering his tenuous status in Columbus.
The Blue Jackets only have four picks (a first, third, fourth and seventh) in the upcoming draft. So in any trade, they'll try to acquire some draft capital back.
Cam Atkinson has a no-trade clause.
Nick Foligno and Brandon Dubinsky have 10-team no-trade lists.

Our take: Trade Bobrovsky now, because it has become very clear he's going to sign elsewhere in free agency. Hold on to Panarin, however. It would be very difficult for this team to advance far in the playoffs this season without him, and even if he doesn't give a firm verbal commitment, there's still a chance he may re-sign.
What to watch: The Devils were bound to regress from their 2017-18 surprise season, and it looks like they knew it. (That's how to explain coach John Hynes' contract extension while the team is struggling this season). There's still a lot to like about this roster, especially among the young players, and the top priority moving forward is signing reigning league MVP Taylor Hall to a contract extension; he's up for a new contract in summer 2020.
With little hope for this current season, especially as Hall has battled some mysterious injuries and goaltending has been a mess, the Devils could view the trade deadline as a time to reset and sell.
The Devils have quite a few players who hit UFA status this summer: Brian Boyle, Marcus Johansson, Keith Kinkaid, Ben Lovejoy, Drew Stafford and Egor Yakovlev. New Jersey could look to move any of these players to create room for a younger player. They also know that being flush with cap space this summer comes at a great time for what is shaping up to be a deep free-agent class. Johansson is the most attractive candidate on this list, but Lovejoy would draw interest, as defensemen with experience always tend to do. A team may look at Kinkaid for goaltending depth, but it appears his value has diminished recently.
Notes/restrictions:
Three of the team's oldest players, Andy Greene (36), Corey Schneider (32) and Travis Zajac (33) have no-trade clauses.
Marcus Johansson has a five-team no-trade list, and Kyle Palmieri has an eight-team no-trade list.
According to Cap Friendly, the Devils have the league's second-lowest project cap hit this season ($66 million). Only the Hurricanes are spending less.
The Devils hold draft picks in each of the seven rounds in each of the next three seasons.
New Jersey has not made a trade since its two moves around last year's deadline, to acquire wingers Pat Maroon and Michael Grabner.

Our take: It's not going to happen for New Jersey this season, so we'd like to see GM Ray Shero use the deadline to trade away a few players for assets. Goaltending needs to be addressed, but that can wait until the summer.
What to watch: The Islanders are great overachievers this season and still find themselves within the playoff hunt. GM Lou Lamoriello has a history of trading at the deadline in his previous stops, so it's not unreasonable to think that the Islanders will be active this February.
Lamoriello doesn't want to veer too far from his plan for building the team the right way; at the same, time, you cannot understate how important a playoff berth would be to the morale of this fan base.
Thanks to new coach Barry Trotz, the defense is in much better shape than we figured it would be. That's not to say this team couldn't benefit from a depth defenseman should one be available at the right price. The goaltending has also been a pleasant surprise, especially Robin Lehner, who was signed to a one-year prove-it deal. There's no pressing need to address goaltending at the deadline.
When it comes to scoring production, New York really drops off in its bottom six, and it's fair to wonder if this team might be in on a player like Gustav Nyquist. Or perhaps the team takes a long look at Charlie Coyle to address long-term depth at center.
The team faces a decision on Jordan Eberle, who becomes a UFA this summer. If he doesn't figure into long-term plans, do you trade him now (even if he does have value for a playoff push)?
Notes/restrictions:
New York does not have a third- or fourth-round pick in the upcoming draft.
Valtteri Filppula and Johnny Boychuk have no-movement clauses.
Leo Komarov has a seven-team no-trade list.
Three of New York's top five scorers become UFAs this summer: Anders Lee, Brock Nelson and Jordan Eberle.

Our take: We'd love to see the Islanders make one move that helps their chances of winning this year. The race for the final playoff spots is wide-open right now, so why not the Isles?
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
What to watch: It's been almost a year since Jeff Gorton and Glen Sather infamously issued a public letter to fans essentially admitting to a rebuild. Shortly after, the Rangers unlocked their roster and let teams (mainly the Lightning) pluck away some of the best talent -- at market price, of course. This trade deadline figures to be a repeat selling spree. The Rangers were pretenders early in the season but have since been exposed for what they are: raw and bereft of superstars, outside their goaltender.
The Rangers will be among the busiest teams fielding inquiries from hungry contenders. Winger Mats Zuccarello is almost guaranteed to go; despite being an overachieving fan favorite, he's 31 with an expiring contract and declining production, meaning he doesn't figure into the team's long-term plans. New York shouldn't expect much for him outside of middle-round draft picks. Fellow expiring contract Kevin Hayes, on the other hand, could command a decent bounty. He wants to stay and will be hard to replace, but his versatility is so attractive that other teams may offer too much for New York to refuse.
The real question is how many other Rangers are finding new homes? Will New York listen to offers on Chris Kreider (two years remaining on the contract, $4.625 million cap hit)? Are any teams interested in Vladislav Namestnikov? Ryan Strome? Brendan Smith? Really, few players are safe.
Notes/restrictions:
Defenseman Marc Staal and goaltender Henrik Lundqvist are the two longest-tenured players on the team, and both carry full no-movement clauses.
There has been some fan speculation about whether Lundqvist would waive that to get the chance to play for a contender and win a Stanley Cup, as his personal window closes. But he has been steadfast about staying thus far.
Kevin Shattenkirk has a 10-team no-trade list. Chris Kreider's list is 11 teams, while Brendan Smith's list is 15 teams.

Our take: If you say you're going to rebuild, then outline the rebuild, you have to follow up on the rebuild. The Rangers should be in the asset-acquiring business this winter, listen to all offers and trade as many players as they can.
What to watch: There's one big name on the Flyers' roster that everyone is monitoring: Wayne Simmonds.
The 30-year-old winger has expressed a desire to stay in Philadelphia, and there have been discussions about a contract extension. However, as February nears and nothing has been completed, it's becoming clear that the Flyers will need to cut ties. Compounding the issue: Simmonds could be the most-attractive rental on the market considering he possesses all the traits that contending teams covet in a winger (scoring touch, speed, effectiveness on the power play, toughness, a willingness to put his body in front of the net ... the list goes on).
The 2018-19 season, which has been defined by leadership turmoil, is a wash for these Flyers. New GM Chuck Fletcher has been patient in assessing the roster, but it's time to get something done so the team can reverse its direction next season. The only moves so far have been relatively minor: Jordan Weal for a sixth-rounder; acquiring even more goalies on the waiver wire. Couldn't there be something more drastic?
Notes/restrictions:
The Flyers don't get full autonomy when it comes to where they deal Simmonds; he has a 12-team no-trade list.
Claude Giroux is the only other player on the Philadelphia roster with trade protection. He has a full no-movement clause.
Philadelphia has one of the best prospect pools in the NHL and also holds each of its draft picks for each of the next three seasons, plus an extra third-rounder and seventh-rounder in 2019.

Our take: It feels as if Fletcher is ready to pounce on something big, and we're ready for it. Acquiring a goalie no longer feels as important with Carter Hart's emergence; rather, there needs to be a shakeup among skaters so next season can start better than this one.
What to watch: GM Jim Rutherford is a guy who is never satisfied. He's always looking for ways to improve his roster. Already this season, Rutherford (who was signed to a three-year extension in November) has orchestrated two deals involving regular roster players: the Carl Hagelin-for-Tanner Pearson swap followed by the Daniel Sprong-for-Marcus Pettersson deal.
Now the Penguins have begun to hit their stride and have played some excellent hockey. That probably lessens the urgency to get a move done, but never, ever rule out something big from Rutherford.
If the Penguins do make moves, what would they be in the market for? Justin Schultz is poised to return from his leg injury sometime after the All-Star break, and Pettersson has impressed in his short stint, but don't be shocked if Rutherford looks for more depth on the blue line. He might not view it as a luxury, but rather essential for a long playoff run. A middle-six scoring winger could also be in the mix. Would a player like Michael Ferland make sense (he carries a very low cap hit at $1.75 million and could play on either the left or right side)?
Notes/restrictions:
Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin have no-movement clauses but are not being moved anyhow.
Kris Letang and Derick Brassard have 18-team no-trade lists.
Phil Kessel has always been the subject of lingering trade rumors (though they have quelled lately). The winger has a eight-team no-trade list.
Patric Hornqvist also has an eight-team no-trade list.
The Penguins do not have a third-rounder or sixth-rounder in the upcoming draft. They are also without their second-rounder in 2020.
According to Cap Friendly, the Penguins are projected to have less than $5 million in cap space.

Our take: Unlike last year, when the Penguins felt they clearly needed depth at center and acquired Derick Brassard, there is no pressing need for the Penguins, especially if Schultz returns quickly and to form. He's already made the moves he has needed to this season, and the team is playing much improved hockey. He should stand pat.
What to watch: The reigning Stanley Cup champions have staved off the hangover thus far and might just be poised for another long playoff run. Washington spent the summer getting the band (mostly) back together, a strategy that seems to have paid off. Just as they did at last year's deadline, the Caps could be looking for small tweaks. (Washington acquired depth defensemen Jacob Jerebuk and Michal Kempny at low prices last February; the Kempny acquisition paid off big time.)
Last week, GM Brian MacLellan hinted at what he's thinking of, telling reporters, "I think the only thing we're going to look for is, is there a hockey trade to be made, salary-for-salary, player-for-player in the forward group?"
If the Caps do send a player out, Andre Burakovsky is a good bet. The 23-year-old first-round pick has been a frequent healthy scratch and, despite flashing his potential for the Caps, he hasn't put up the regular production management has expected of him. Considering his status as an impending RFA, Washington might be inclined to just let go.
Notes/restrictions:
It's highly unlikely the Caps would move one of their core players, but Alex Ovechkin, Nicklas Backstrom, T.J. Oshie, John Carlson, Matt Niskanen and Braden Holtby all have lists ranging from seven to 15 teams to which they cannot be traded.
There's a reason MacLellan mentioned a trade would have to be player-for-player: The Caps do not have a lot of flexibility at all, with less than $1 million in cap space.
MacLellan has made two splashy trade deadline acquisitions in his tenure, and neither panned out: Kevin Shattenkirk in 2017 and Curtis Glencross in 2015.
Our take: Burakovsky is a player who could probably benefit from a change of scenery. If the Caps are wary of his restricted free agency this summer, they should find a taker for him now, ideally for a forward who can plug in to Washington's middle six. Other than that, no huge moves are necessary.

One great line doesn't make a Stanley Cup champion -- but it certainly doesn't hurt. We debate the top trios around the league.
The drawback to a muscular posterior? It's tough to find a pair of jeans that will fit. Connor McDavid and other NHL stars chronicle the struggle.
Football is king in the Cotton State, but from Huntsville to Birmingham and, yes, Tuscaloosa, there are many puckheads to be found.
What to watch: It's been a hectic few months for the Blackhawks, who -- after firing Joel Quenneville and promoting AHL coach Jeremy Colliton -- insist they are not in a rebuild, but rather are retooling. Stan Bowman is known as a general manager who is always working the phones, and he has made 23 separate trades since January 2017.
Most observers are waiting to see if Bowman will do something drastic this season; though it's still feasible the Blackhawks could make a push for the playoffs, logical convention says with a projected point total of 70, they're already out. What would be dramatic: if the Blackhawks moved one of their marquee-name players who made up the core for Chicago's three Stanley Cups (Duncan Keith, Brent Seabrook, Patrick Kane, Jonathan Toews and Corey Crawford). Each of those skaters carries a no-movement clause; Crawford's is a 10-team no-trade list. In a Dec. 16 conversation with ESPN, Bowman said he had not had any conversations with any of those players regarding waiving their clauses. "At this time I don't anticipate having those conversations," Bowman said. "Though of course things can change."
Teams still certainly will call the Blackhawks. Bowman has had some luck with middle-tier trades lately (see: the Dylan Strome acquisition, getting the Oilers to bite on Brandon Manning's lamentable contract), so a likely scenario could be finding a taker for functional middle-six center Artem Anisimov.
Notes/restrictions:
Anisimov is the most likely Blackhawks player to be traded before the deadline, but the 30-year-old has a 10-team list of teams to which he cannot be traded.
Chris Kunitz, 35, has been a disappointing free-agent acquisition, though his one-year deal carries a full no-movement clause.
With the emergence of Collin Delia, the Blackhawks are less reliant on Cam Ward. However, the 34-year-old's mediocre performance plus $3 million cap hit make him a trade candidate only for truly desperate teams. Ward also has a no-movement clause, which he theoretically could waive if a contender was interested.

Our take: There's not much more Bowman can do to this roster in season if the big players (with the big cap hits) aren't going to waive their no-move clauses. He should continue making tweaks, make a small trade or two, then push a bigger reset button this offseason.
What to watch: The Avalanche are in a precarious spot. Yes, they've arrived ahead of schedule and have proved they can still hang among the playoff teams. But they're still raw, and declaring this is the year to be all-in might not make the most sense, considering how many teams remain in the mix. Plus, that would seem to be off-brand for GM Joe Sakic, who has preached patience with roster construction. It feels highly unlikely the Avs will be in the market for a potentially one-and-done rental like Artemi Panarin, Kevin Hayes or Wayne Simmonds. The last thing Sakic wants to do right now is trade away any of his promising young players.
Now, there are plenty of ways for this team to improve, and a glaring one is secondary scoring. It's a bit improved from the first-line-or-bust setup on last season's roster, but there's still a significant drop-off from Gabriel Landeskog, Nathan MacKinnon and Mikko Rantanen to everyone else. Perhaps taking a flier on a middle-six winger like Andre Burakovsky makes sense, considering he's only 23 and becomes a restricted free agent this summer. So, theoretically, if he meshes well with the team, there's a chance to keep him around and it doesn't veer too far from the plan. A young defenseman (could this be the team that lands a player like Dougie Hamilton?) would help too.
Since this team will be wary of trading future assets, one player who could be on the move is goaltender Semyon Varlamov, considering Philipp Grubauer is in the wings and veteran goaltending help could be of use for some buyers.
Notes/restrictions:
Carl Soderberg has a 10-team no trade list while Gabriel Landeskog and Erik Johnson have 19-team no trade lists. No other players on the Colorado roster have any trade protection.
Colorado has a ton of draft capital. They have each of their picks in rounds one through three in each of the next three years, including two first-round picks in 2019 and two third-round picks in 2019.
The Avalanche could trade their own first-round pick in 2019, but they'll want to hold on to the one they acquired from the Senators. Considering how Ottawa's season has panned out, that pick should be very high and could potentially land either Jack Hughes or Kaapo Kakko -- an in-house answer for secondary scoring help in 2019-20 and beyond.
The Avalanche have plenty of cap space available. They'll need to give Rantanen a new contract this summer, but there's still ample space to go around.

Our take: It would be prudent for Sakic to acquire some scoring help for his over-burdened top line ... as long as the Avs aren't giving up too much. This isn't the year to mortgage the future and go-all in. The team is simply too raw still and there are too many holes.
What to watch: Oh, what to make of the Stars? The team is still transitioning to new coach Jim Montgomery, is playing inconsistent hockey, is struggling to score -- and the star players have been called out in a profane rant by the team's CEO. And yet, it looks like Tyler Seguin is turning it around, and they're bubbling under the playoff cutoff. The quintessential question for GM Jim Nill: Is this really the year to go all-in? (And also, how does his job security factor into any decisions he makes?)
There's no question that upgrades could help, especially in the top-six forward department.
Nill excused himself from any irrational spending at last year's deadline; a midseason acquisition may not have changed the complexion of the season, but you have to wonder if things might have ended differently. The Stars, who were in playoff position for nearly 80 percent of the season, floundered down the stretch, including a six-game winless "road trip from hell" that cost them a playoff spot.
If the Stars are trending up and are in mix for a top-three spot in the Central Division, they'll want to add scoring help for a playoff push. Gustav Nyquist and Mats Zuccarello are available rentals who could make sense.
Long term, this team will need a second-line center as well as a second-pairing defenseman. It doesn't seem likely either of those needs will be fulfilled at the deadline -- at least for a long-term commitment -- but it is possible.
Notes/restrictions:
Captain Jamie Benn has a full no-movement clause, as do Seguin, Alexander Radulov and Jason Spezza. Goalie Ben Bishop does as well, though Bishop's terms change in 2020-21 to a 10-team no-trade list.
Marc Methot has a 10-team no-trade list, while Martin Hanzal has a 15-team list.
The Stars are tight against the cap (with less than $4 million in projected cap space at the deadline, according to Cap Friendly), meaning they would need to clear space to orchestrate any significant moves.

Our take: It will be difficult to do something drastic, as in moving any core players. Acquiring a bargain scoring winger such as Zuccarello could give this team an extra push. If not, just let the chips fall where they may this season, and chalk it up to transitioning to a new coach.
What to watch: When the Wild hired Paul Fenton as general manager, everyone was curious as to how he would put his stamp on the roster. Minnesota has proved it is talented and deep enough to win in the regular season, though it hasn't showed the oomph to make a run in the postseason. So far, Fenton (who cut his teeth in the Predators organization) shocked us all by ... doing nothing. He has made only two deals in his tenure so far, both on the minor league level. Minnesota looks awfully similar to last year's team, except they've floundered of late and are on the fringes of the playoff picture.
Fenton has one of two choices: Shake up the current roster, or stay the course and re-evaluate over the summer. Fenton's choice will serve as an indicator for if he views this team's Stanley Cup window open with its current (but aging) core. If Fenton opts to sell, Charlie Coyle and Nino Niederreiter have been at the nexus of trade rumors since last season -- when Fenton's predecessor, Chuck Fletcher, was running the team -- and are the likeliest candidates to move out; Fenton made good on the Niederreiter possibility on Jan. 17, though the return wasn't perhaps as high as some might've hoped. If it somehow becomes a fire sale, Eric Staal -- who had an incredibly productive age-33 season but is mired in a slump -- could draw interest as an affordable top-six center. Staal is a unrestricted free agent this summer and has said he'd prefer to re-sign in Minnesota, but it's unclear if he'd fit in Fenton's plans if the GM is leaning toward a retool.
Notes/restrictions:
Staal and 29-year-old defenseman Jared Spurgeon are affordable veteran options for contending teams. Spurgeon, who carries a $5.2 million cap hit, is a longer-term rental, with a contract expiring after the 2019-20 season.
Both Staal and Spurgeon have 10 team no-trade lists; when Fenton was hired, he reportedly asked all the players to update their preferences.
If the Wild are looking to add, they'll have some room for flexibility. According to Cap Friendly, their deadline cap space is projected at about $8.6 million.
Minnesota has only one restricted free agent to take care of this summer; Joel Eriksson Ek's entry-level deal expires after this season.

Our take: This is a roster that feels stuck in neutral. With so many teams in the mix for contention this season, the Wild are a long shot in this spring's playoff field. That means Fenton would be wise to sell at the deadline. Moving Staal and Coyle should be fairly easy and could garner decent return.
What to watch: The Predators exited the playoffs earlier than most predicted last season, and GM David Poile wisely reacted by doing nothing at all. This is the essentially the same roster that we saw win the Presidents' Trophy in 2018-19. The Preds haven't been quite as dominant thus far this season, but they've weathered a plethora of injuries early, and as long as they're healthy, they're poised to make a run.
Poile has exercised patience thus far. But everyone knows he's a GM who likes to make a splash, and it's as if he saved his summer moves to find out exactly what his team needed midway through the season. He'll certainly be in conversations regarding the bigger names in February.
Secondary scoring punch could help, considering that was a vulnerability for Nashville during last spring's ill-fated run. The Predators could look at wingers such as Wayne Simmonds or Mats Zuccarello. The latter would cost far less than Simmonds, considering the Rangers forward has struggled quite a bit this season. Simmonds adds an element of grit, which is lacking a bit in the current forward group.
Notes/restrictions:
There is only one player on the roster with movement protection, and that's goaltender Pekka Rinne, who has a 10-team no-trade list.
Nashville made an unusual trade at last year's deadline in that it was within the division. The Predators acquired winger Ryan Hartman from the Blackhawks in exchange for prospect Victor Ejdsell, a first-round pick and a second-round pick.
The Predators were without picks in the first three rounds of the 2018 draft; however, they are well-positioned for the future: Nashville holds a pick in Rounds 1 through 7 in each of the next three years. Some of those picks might be used as trade capital.

Our take: Considering the Predators' sizzle-out last spring, we'd like to see Poile pull the trigger on one exciting move to help push this team over its playoff hump. A scoring winger makes sense, especially one who can add an element of toughness. Who fits that bill perfectly? Simmonds.
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
What to watch: GM Doug Armstrong has threatened to make seismic moves to the roster, and he hasn't followed up ... yet. But you get the sense he'd like to. The Blues have risen from the bottom-dwelling ashes to within four points of a playoff spot. If they keep up the ascent, Armstrong may not do anything too drastic. But it feels like this team will still be among the sellers.
In the sure-to-be-packing-his-bags department: Patrick Maroon had a terrific homecoming story when he took less money and term to play for the city he grew up in (and be with his son), but he hasn't produced and therefore is an ideal deadline mover. He's only on a one-year deal, worth $1.75 million, and his rugged style and experience thriving with skill players make him very attractive for contenders. (The Blues won't get much back because of his production this season.)
In the OK-that-feels-harsh-but-you-have-to-do-what-you-have-to-do category: Consider Brayden Schenn, the 27-year-old center. At a $5.25 million cap hit through 2019-20, teams might give up a decent bounty to get a guy who has averaged 61 points per season over the past three. Put right-handed defenseman Colton Parayko ($5.5 million through 2021-22) here, too.
In the holy-cow-did-he-really-do-that section: How about superstar forward Vladimir Tarasenko and captain Alex Pietrangelo? Both of those players would need to command multiple high draft picks as well as roster players in return, and these deals would qualify as blockbusters.
Notes/restrictions:
Several Blues players have no-trade lists worked into their contracts, including Tyler Bozak (10-team no-trade list), David Perron (five-team list), Maroon (eight-team list). Maroon's kicks in on Jan. 31.
There has been scuttlebutt about the potential of Pietrangelo being moved, but he carries a full no-trade clause that he would have to waive.
Jay Bouwmeester and Alexander Steen both have full no-trade clauses.

Our take: Considering the general disappointment that has been the 2018-19 St. Louis Blues season, Armstrong needs to change the complexion of this team for it to take a step forward. However, there's enough talent there not to give up on entirely. A few mid-level tweaks might be good enough to reset the culture. Disposing of too many big names could have adverse rippling effects. After all, many believed this to be a playoff team in the preseason.
What to watch: The window is wide open for the Jets, who soon will see themselves in salary-cap hell once they have to pay Patrik Laine and Kyle Connor the rich contracts that they deserve. After this season, the Jets also will have to manage keeping the blue line competitive, considering they likely can't afford keeping both Tyler Myers (impending UFA) and Jacob Trouba (RFA), or sign replacements of the same caliber.
What does that mean for this season's Jets? GM Kevin Cheveldayoff could look to move either Myers or Trouba to recoup value now, though it wouldn't be surprising to see both stay through the season, considering how important they are to Winnipeg's defensive corps. Cheveldayoff, who made a sizable move at last season's deadline to acquire second-line center Paul Stastny, could do something similar in February because he has the space to do so. Rangers forward Kevin Hayes has been linked to the Jets, for good reason. The soon-to-be UFA is a rugged forward who is versatile and could plug in anywhere into Winnipeg's lineup. His style of play (plus previous playoff experience) is perfect for a team looking to make a run in the Western Conference. Philadelphia's Wayne Simmonds would be a huge boon. The Jets also might look to add a defenseman.
Notes/restrictions:
Winnipeg has nearly $12 million in cap space now -- money they likely won't have next season after paying up for Connor and Laine.
Since taking the job as Winnipeg's GM in 2011, Cheveldayoff hasn't been known to be very active in the trade market. Last season's big move to acquire Stastny was considered off-brand for the usually modest Cheveldayoff, who rarely makes a splash when it comes to moving high draft picks or big-name players.
The Jets have four players over the age of 31 with some version of a no-movement clause (Bryan Little has a full no-movement clause. Blake Wheeler and Dustin Byfuglien have lists of 14 teams to which they cannot be traded, and Mathieu Perreault has a five-team list).
Defenseman Dmitry Kulikov, 28, also has a six-team list of teams to which he cannot be traded.
Winnipeg has eight players who become restricted free agents this summer.
Our take: Go for it, Jets. While this is a team patiently built via draft picks, adding one good piece (whether it be Hayes, Simmonds or a top-four defenseman like Los Angeles' Jake Muzzin) could be the difference between falling short in the Western Conference finals and going all the way.

What to watch: The standings, mostly. The Ducks already traded Andrew Cogliano, a well-liked veteran on the team since 2011, in the midst of a double-digit losing streak. If the season doesn't turn around to the point where GM Bob Murray is comfortable with Anaheim as a championship contender, how deep will the cuts go?
The fact is that the Ducks have a few players locked into no-move clauses, a quartet of defensemen the team would rather not move and some young forwards -- Rickard Rakell, Ondrej Kase, Nick Ritchie -- on bargain contracts who shouldn't be moved. From that defensive corps, 27-year-old Cam Fowler might generate the most interest at $6.5 million against the cap through 2026 on a new eight-year contract. But teams usually don't ink players to long-term deals only to flip them after one year, and Murray gave Fowler a modified no-trade clause as well.
One name worth noting: Jakob Silfverberg. The versatile winger is a stellar defender whose point production just hasn't reached the promise of his 49-point season two years ago. He's cheap ($3.75 million in average annual value), he's 28 and he's an unrestricted free agent at season's end. He's got value if Murray decides his next contract is too rich for the Ducks.
There's also backup goalie Ryan Miller, who was having a fine season before a lower-body injury in December landed him on injured reserve. But he has a modified no-trade clause as well.
Notes/restrictions:
Fowler's modified no-trade clause means he submits "a four-team trade list" to the Ducks, while Miller submits a six-team list, per Cap Friendly.
Anaheim is saddled with veteran players who have full no-move clauses: Ryan Getzlaf (33), Ryan Kesler (34) and Corey Perry (33), who has yet to play this season due to injury. Kesler hasn't been the same player since hip surgery in 2017 -- coach Randy Carlyle has called him "adequate" this season, but he has six goals since Feb. 9, 2018 -- but even if he didn't have a full no-move, one wonders how many takers there would be for the shell of Kesler at $6.875 million annually through 2022. Did Vancouver actually win that trade?
The Ducks do not have their third- and seventh-rounders in 2019, but otherwise own their draft picks through 2021.

Our take: If the asking price from Silfverberg and for Silfverberg are both on the high side, then Murray might want to ship him out before the deadline. Trading one of the defensemen is better left for the draft. But again, watch the standings: Despite an epic winless streak, the Ducks are still very much in the playoff race. If Murray won't cut Carlyle until after the season, he probably isn't cutting bait with this roster until then either.
What to watch: GM John Chayka has been active at the trade deadline before, but mostly as a seller: Please recall the Martin Hanzal, Michael Stone and Tobias Rieder deals, all of which worked out pretty well for the Coyotes.
There isn't that type of player on the Coyotes' roster as this deadline approaches, although pending UFA Richard Panik ($2.8 million) probably comes the closest. Does that mean Chayka will be more of a buyer, as Arizona continues to try to chase down a wild-card spot? Perhaps, especially with the Coyotes owning the third-meekest offense in the NHL at 2.53 goals per game.
But the biggest driver of what the Coyotes end up doing in the trade market is their own health. Along with forward Nick Schmaltz and goalie Antti Raanta, who are reportedly done for the season, the Coyotes are looking for lineup returns from forwards Michael Grabner, Brad Richardson and Christian Dvorak, and defenseman Jason Demers, who was thought to be lost for the season but could return from a knee injury. Those timetables are going to affect whatever Chayka does.
Notes/restrictions:
Among the players with trade protection are defenseman Alex Goligoski, signed through 2021 with a full no-move clause, somewhat inexplicably; defenseman Niklas Hjalmarsson, who has a no-trade clause that allows him to submit 10 teams on this current deal and has a full no-move clause that kicks in on July 1 for his next contract; Richardson, who has a full no-move clause; and Grabner, who submits an eight-team no-trade list.
The Coyotes have all of their picks for the next three years, except for their fifth- and seventh-round picks in 2019. They also own the Blackhawks' third-round pick this season.
Next season, Arizona still will have Marian Hossa's $5.275 million in dead cap space and the final $1,944,444 of Mike Ribeiro's contract buyout on their cap.

Our take: Again, it comes down to health. If the Coyotes are confident they're getting enough bodies back where overcoming a four-point standings deficit for the wild card is feasible, then trade a couple of picks for some offensive rental help. If not, then Panik ... and wait until next season.
What to watch: Sitting in first place in the Pacific Division after 47 games, the Flames are the biggest surprise in the Western Conference, but not a fleeting one: They're plus-40 (!) in goal differential, thanks to an offense that boasts four 20-goal scorers. That none of them would be named "James Neal" might be an even bigger surprise.
Neal is one piece that doesn't fit on this well-crafted team, with just four goals in 46 games and a minus-11 goal differential. He doesn't have any trade protection and at $5.75 million AAV (average annual value) through 2023 would seem primed for a "you take our headache and we take your similar-salary-cap-hit one" type of trade. But that might wait until the summer.
The targets for the Flames: depth on defense, in the form of a rental who could solidify their third pairing (someone like Trevor Daley comes to mind); another goaltender, just in case "Big Game" Dave Rittich is injured or turns into a pumpkin; and some additional help for the bottom six. Or, if they have a chance to swing for the fences, how perfect would Mark Stone fit in this group?
The assets for the Flames, besides Neal: forwards Michael Frolik, who is signed through 2020 and has 17 points in 30 games but hasn't always seen the commensurate ice time, as his agent has mentioned now and again; Derek Ryan, a serviceable center signed through 2021 with no trade protection at $3.125 million annually; and Austin Czarnik, who has another year at $1.25 million.
Notes/restrictions:
Beyond Frolik, the Flames have a few players with trade restrictions: center Mikael Backlund, who submits a 10-team trade list; defenseman Mark Giordano, with a full no-trade clause; defenseman T.J. Brodie, who has an eight-team no-trade list; and goalie Mike Smith, who has an eight-team no-trade list.
The Flames do not have second-, fourth-, sixth- or seventh-round picks in this year's draft. But they do have the Islanders' fourth-rounder and a seventh from Carolina. Calgary has all of its picks in 2020 and 2021.

Our take: Go for it! The Flames are an offensively explosive team with a defensive corps that compares well to any top four in the conference. Add that defenseman, add that goalie and then see if anyone is in need of a slightly used James Neal.
What to watch: Somehow, general manager Peter Chiarelli is still allowed access to a working telephone, so there's a lot to watch for when it comes to the Oilers.
TSN's Ryan Rishaug recently reported that the Oil have sent their scouts and staff marching orders to find help at forward with a "first-round pick, a goaltender, maybe a young developing forward likely all in play." So buckle up, kids, because Uncle Peter has a job to continue attempting to save by any means necessary.
The needs for the Oilers are many, beginning at the forward position. In theory, any goal-scoring winger they bring on can get the Connor McDavid Bump. Players such as Gustav Nyquist or Mats Zuccarello, both on expiring deals, could be intriguing to that end. They also need more puck-movers on the back end, but that's probably an issue for the summer. And frankly not one that you want Chiarelli to address, given what he's anted up for defensemen in the past.
To that end, watching the Oilers is more about what's leaving than what's arriving. For example: While forward Jesse Puljujarvi hasn't come close to fulfilling his hype as a No. 4 overall draft pick, he's still only 20 years old. It's entirely possible he could be in play.
Notes/restrictions:
Cam Talbot, who most certainly would be the goalie the Oilers trade, is a UFA this summer with a $4,166,667 cap hit. He has a modified no-trade clause that limits the Oilers' options to 10 destinations.
Other trade restrictions: forward Milan Lucic has a full no-move clause and is signed through 2023; defenseman Adam Larsson has a modified no-trade clause of eight teams, and is signed through 2021; defenseman Kris Russell (signed through 2021) has a full no-move clause, hilariously; and injured defenseman Andrej Sekera has a full no-move clause.
The Oilers have all their picks for the next two seasons except a fifth-rounder and a conditional third-rounder in 2019. The latter pick is either Edmonton's or the Islanders' headed to Florida, whichever one is the higher pick.

Our take: Pray for Connor.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
What to watch: Everyone not named Drew Doughty, Anze Kopitar and Dustin Brown. And yes, that does include Jonathan Quick on the watch list, being that he makes $5.8 million annually through 2023 and has no trade protection.
GM Rob Blake has to dramatically reshape the roster of this Kings team, which has managed to prove both the "they're too slow" and the "they're too old" camps correct in their assessments. They have seven players over the age of 30 signed through 2021. They have to be open for business, and in a big way. They tried to squeeze out a little more from the vets who helped bring multiple Cups to L.A. Now it's time to find another bag of oranges.
The changes start on defense, where Jake Muzzin ($4 million AAV, signed through 2020) and Alec Martinez ($4 million, signed through 2021) are going to attract some attention. Up front, they'd love to ship out star forward Jeff Carter ($5,272,727 AAV, signed through 2022), but even without trade protection, history shows us that you don't want an unhappy Jeff Carter on your roster, so it would have to be a place he wants to end up. Carl Hagelin, 30, was seemingly acquired to be traded again at the deadline. He carries a $3.75 million hit and will be an unrestricted free agent this summer.
Notes/restrictions:
The Kings' full no-move clauses include Kopitar, Ilya Kovalchuk and Doughty.
The Kings have a few players with modified no-trade clauses: Brown, who submits a list of eight teams to which he can be traded; forward Nate Thompson, who has a 10-team no-trade list; and defenseman Dion Phaneuf, who submits a 12-team trade list.
Los Angeles has all of its draft picks for the next three seasons.

Our take: Obviously, many of the players we mentioned here are as good as gone. But the real trick for Rob Blake is going to be how short the bridge is going to be from the this retool to the next competitive era for the Kings, when players such as Rasmus Kupari and Mikey Anderson (and, health willing, Gabriel Vilardi) are making an impact.
What to watch: If there's a level beyond "all-in," GM Doug Wilson is on that level. Consider: The Evander Kane trade and signing. The pursuit of John Tavares. The Erik Karlsson trade, and his potential re-signing.
The Sharks don't have much in the way of cap space to make something dramatic happen at the deadline -- just over $1.5 million, according to Cap Friendly -- and there isn't much salary they can ship out. But you know Wilson's going to try in this Western Conference arms race, perhaps for added center depth or more scoring on the wing.
Notes/restrictions:
Alas, the Sharks have mortgaged the future for the present. They don't own their first-round pick this season or next season. If the Sharks make the playoffs, they can choose to keep their 2019 first-rounder and give Buffalo its 2020 first-rounder, or hand over their 2019 pick for signing Kane. Ottawa gets this season's first if the Sharks miss the playoffs, as well as the pick that doesn't go to Buffalo in the above scenario. Their second-round pick is conditionally the Senators', too, as they get either the Sharks' or the Panthers' second, which San Jose owns. Their fourth-round pick in 2019 was dealt to Buffalo conditionally: The Sharks can keep it, but then have to give the Sabres their third in 2020. Oh, wait, there's more: No sixth-round or seventh-round picks in 2020. And their 2021 second-round pick goes to the Senators if Karlsson re-signs, and it becomes a 2021 first-rounder if the Sharks make the Stanley Cup Final in 2019. This is the kind of breakdown that usually requires a series of surveillance photos and string on an office wall to make sense.
There are only two Sharks with two full no-move clauses: Joe Thornton and Marc-Edouard Vlasic.
The Sharks have several modified no-trade clauses. Brent Burns, Evander Kane, Joe Pavelski and Logan Couture submit a three-team list to which they can be traded. Erik Karlsson has a 10-team no-trade list. Keep in mind that if Karlsson is actually traded at the deadline and ends up in the Eastern Conference, the Sharks have to give the Senators another first-rounder. Not as if he'd be traded, mind you, but just an FYI.

Our take: Rare is the deadline when Doug Wilson isn't active, and the Sharks are going for it. Limitations on cap space and assets might make it difficult, but we're guessing he stays aggressive and adds a veteran winger.
What to watch: With due respect to the Flames, the Canucks are the biggest shock contender in the Western Conference. Much of this is due to the arrival of Elias Pettersson, as we haven't seen a goal-scorer transform his team like this since Alex Ovechkin first strapped on the eagle for the Capitals. (And yes, I might even include "more than McDavid" here, because Pettersson has had so much influence on the organization as a whole.)
So the Canucks are battling for a playoff spot, which undoubtedly changes their expectations for the short-term future and for the trade deadline. That's specifically true on defense: If the Canucks were calculating their lottery odds instead of counting the number of points they are outside of the wild card, then Alex Edler ($5 million AAV, UFA, no-trade clause) might be closer to a trade than a new contract. Chris Tanev ($4.5 million, signed through 2020, modified no-trade) and Erik Gudbranson ($4 million, signed through 2021) also now seem likely to hang around.
Among the assets they could move: Michael Del Zotto, facing UFA status and without trade protection (a move they completed on Jan. 16, sending him to Anaheim); forward Nikolay Goldobin, who will be a restricted free agent this summer and is having a strong season and has his defenders, but the Canucks could cut bait after a recent benching; and center Brandon Sutter, who has a $4.375 million AAV and is signed through 2021 with a full no-trade clause until July 1, when it becomes a list of 15 teams.
Notes/restrictions:
The Canucks have all of their picks for the next three years, as well as those from the Senators and Capitals in the sixth round this season.
Among the no-trade clauses are winger Loui Eriksson, Sutter and Edler; Tanev has an eight-team no-trade list. Please recall that Antoine Roussel and Jay Beagle actually have modified no-trade clauses, with 15 teams to whom they can't be dealt.

Our take: The Canucks are clearly ahead of schedule, and it's only a good thing if they remain in the playoff hunt. (Ask Taylor Hall and Jordan Eberle about spending your formative years in the basement. Hint: Great for hockey bloggers, not so much for young NHL stars.) But it's not worth mortgaging the future for this season. No team with 47 points in 47 games should consider itself a buyer. Win the long game, not the deadline.
What to watch: With $3.38 million in cap space and a literal buffet of future assets, it's a virtual certainty that the Knights are going to be active at the trade deadline. Especially after getting a taste of championship contention last season.
There was heavy speculation that Blues center Brayden Schenn ($5.125 million AAV through 2020) could be a trade target due to his Brandon Wheat Kings ties with Vegas assistant GM Kelly McCrimmon. The Blues' return to the playoff race could affect that. Capitals winger Andre Burakovsky is available and GM George McPhee drafted him in 2013.
But rather than another body up front, one assumes the Knights are going to continue to bolster their back end. Not only because of their pursuit of Erik Karlsson during the last calendar year, but because they can read the rosters of the other Western Conference contenders and see their depth on defense. Vegas needs another point producer on the back end. Back to the Blues for a moment: Wouldn't Alex Pietrangelo be the perfect right-handed shot defenseman for the Knights, and wouldn't the Knights be an intriguing trade partner for the Blues if the latter had an eye on the future?
Notes/restrictions:
Center Paul Stastny has a 10-team no-trade list, while winger Reilly Smith and center Jonathan Marchessault have eight-team ones. Goalie Marc-Andre Fleury has a limited no-trade, submitting a list of 10 teams. He's also going nowhere.
The Knights have all of their own upcoming picks, save for a third-rounder in 2021 and a seventh-rounder this season. They also have 2019 third-rounders from the Predators and Jets, the Canadiens' 2019 fifth-rounder and second-round picks in 2020 from the Stars and Penguins.
Our take: Now that the Golden Knights are back to challenging for a division crown, it's time to put those future assets to use and grab the puck-moving defenseman they've been chasing for their first two seasons of existence.

SEA ISLAND, Ga. -- The NHL held its board of governors meetings this week at a sprawling, slightly hard-to-get-to resort with a lobby featuring a 50-foot Christmas tree and a distinct scent that led attendees to believe somebody must have walked around the properties with a Bed Bath & Beyond bottled spray called "Holiday Dreams." It was quite the scene.
The big news to emerge, of course, is that the league will welcome Seattle as its 32nd franchise for the 2021-22 season. But there were a few other nuggets to trickle out of the two-day session as well. ESPN parsed through some quotes to help you translate why they were said and what they actually mean.
"While it's an estimate -- some would call it a guess, although we've been pretty good about this -- we think it'll be about $83 million, give or take. It could be a million more, it could be a million less, but the number we told our clubs to focus on was in the $83 million range, which would be up about $3.5 million over where we are this season." -- commissioner Gary Bettman on the salary cap
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
The $83 million cap number for 2019-2020 has been discussed on several occasions by Bettman. It's a safe, middle-ground number to go on for next season because the ultimate number is determined by whether the NHLPA triggers its inflator clause.
The players can raise the cap by up to 5 percent. Last season, the NHLPA used only a 1.25 percent inflator, which was just the third time it didn't use the maximum inflator. It's a decision fueled by matters such as escrow: The higher the cap, the higher the potential withholding from players. If they decide to inflate the cap by 5 percent again, it could crest more than $85 million for 2019-20.
"We certainly harbored hope. I have business cards I'm going to have to toss out that say Seattle 2020. This is an organization that's going to be built around our fans, and as we thought about this on behalf of our fans, we realized that perhaps we wouldn't open the season with our fans in our new building, perhaps the training center wouldn't be ready. Now, an expansion draft will be held in our building. Our players can skate at that training center in time for our first camp, and we know opening day will be truly spectacular. So waiting a little longer seemed to make a lot of sense, and we ultimately agreed with the league." -- Seattle president and CEO Tod Leiweke on the team entering the league in 2021 versus 2020
The Seattle ownership group targeted a 2020 entry date all along. They believed they would be ready. But the league had reservations about whether the renovations to Key Arena -- which have reached $800 million -- would be completed in time. It isn't exactly easy to build in Seattle, and the Oak View Group would be pushing up against a deadline to get it done.
That led Leiweke and his partners to acquiesce to the NHL's preferred timeline, which conspicuously avoids an awkward entry when the league might (gasp!) be in another work stoppage. It was a concession, but Leiweke is smartly spinning it forward, saying the new timeline could be an advantage. Another year to scout players. Longer time to hire, which means a better crop of candidates for the GM and coaching openings. When Seattle enters the league, the team will be fully ready to make a splash, just like Las Vegas did.
"If we're going to do a World Cup and do all the planning that's necessary, if we don't know by the first of the year, there's no sense in trying to pull off a World Cup for 2020. For the last two years, we've been anxious to anchor plans for a World Cup. But for whatever reason, the players' association hasn't been prepared to do that. I don't know enough about what the players' association is doing right now to have any reason to be optimistic or pessimistic because there hasn't been any meaningful dialogue about those issues." -- Bettman on the World Cup of Hockey
The NHL would like to do a World Cup of Hockey in 2020, the second edition of the resurrected international tournament. The league is expected to jettison the popular Team North America, which was filled with 23-and-under stars, and the oddly successful Team Europe, which lost in the final to Canada, in favor of two new national teams. The tournament is also expected to be multisite after being held in only Toronto in 2016.
Now that the NHL is headed to Seattle, our readers offer their best ideas on everything from names to uniform designs.
When will they start playing? What will they be called? How is the NHL going to realign? We answer the key questions after the big announcement.
Unlike some other recent expansion teams, Seattle looks like a wide-open, empty net goal for the NHL.
The question is whether there will be enough labor peace for the World Cup. The NHLPA has a chance to reopen the collective bargaining agreement in September 2019. The NHL and the International Ice Hockey Federation have both said that reopening the CBA would mean no World Cup. "Our position is we don't want to hold it if there is labor uncertainty," deputy commissioner Bill Daly said earlier this year. "We really need labor certainty to play it. It didn't work so well in 2004 when we tried that."
Essentially, Bettman has set a deadline of the 2019 NHL All-Star Game for the players to indicate whether they want to participate in the World Cup. Donald Fehr, executive director of the NHLPA, has said that he doesn't believe the CBA negotiations should be tied to the World Cup's future for 2020.
"Look, there is a great demand for NHL hockey, and we're in a great spot, as we think our franchises have never been more stable. The commissioner alluded to it, but at some point, there is some limit to the amount of markets that add value to the league. My quote was interpreted as an invitation [for] further expansion. It wasn't intended to be interpreted this way. Somebody asked me, 'What is it with 32 franchises?' and I was like, 'There's really no magic to 32. There could be 30, 31. There could be 35.' It's really -- the equation our board considers in the addition of another franchise is, does it add to the asset value of the league?" -- Daly on the future of expansion
Daly and Bettman have said that there is no magic to the number 32. But it is a nice, round number that allows for four divisions of eight teams each. Even though the league has, in Bettman's words, "never been healthier," there's probably no rush to expand too quickly or expand for the sake of expanding.
Instead, the league will probably take a pause and use this as a chance to assess its current franchises and the health in their markets. Instead of expansion, expect the next potential move to be relocation. The most attractive city right now is Houston, considering its size (No. 4 in U.S. population, which helps the league grow its American footprint) and the fact that it already has a hockey-amenable arena.
"I would say I'm more disappointed with how this played out, but these are complicated matters. ... I think it would be, for a whole host of reasons, nice [to have a downtown arena]. But Mr. [Eugene] Melnyk has said that if he has to make Canadian Tire Centre work, he can do that. But again, let's not draw any conclusions yet. This is a complicated situation, for a lot of reasons. The project, as originally envisioned, isn't viable." -- Bettman on the Ottawa Senators' arena deal
The Senators' arena situation was updated to the board of governors, as Melnyk (sadly, not in attendance) has filed a $700 million lawsuit against his partners in what was to be a new downtown arena on LeBreton Flats, calling it a "failed joint venture." The Senators have an announced average home attendance of 14,217 at their arena, though Ottawa has given away and discounted tickets this season. There's concern around the NHL that the Senators need a downtown arena to be viable in that market, which is a concern shared often by Melnyk himself.
"Andy Barroway has made it clear that he's asking for a partner. There's been a lot of discussion about that. He's hopeful there can be something in the near term. ... Look, the efforts are on getting a new arena. We have some patience." -- Daly on the Arizona Coyotes
If it's an NHL board of governors meeting, then someone is asking about the future of the Arizona Coyotes. Barroway became the sole owner of the Coyotes in June 2017. One year later, it was reported that he was seeking to sell 49 percent of the franchise that he valued at $500 million.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
While that process plays out, there's the matter of the team's next arena. The location of Gila River Arena in Glendale has been blamed for the team's woeful attendance. A deal with Arizona State University on a new building fell apart last year, and there has been little discussion about what the next option is for the Coyotes.
But the biggest Coyotes news out of the board of governors meeting was that the team will be shifted to the Central Division in 2021-22, when Seattle enters the Pacific. It's a move that has done little to quell speculation about the franchise relocating (again), as many observers have noticed that Houston would be open to an NHL franchise and can, apparently, read a map.
"We're going to take our time. There's a group of owners involved. We're going to listen to our fans, and we're going to do it right, and we're not going to have a time pressure, but it's something we're working on each and every day." -- Leiweke on choosing a team name
Let's be honest: What's the No. 1 thing fans care about regarding this new franchise? The name (and the color scheme). Once you settle on a name, though, it sticks. And it appears that the ownership group understands just how serious a decision this is. They're going to take their time, conduct some market research, consult experts and decide upon what's right: the Seattle Sasquatch (please?).

It's the first intermission of Monday night's New York Islanders versus Washington Capitals game -- the first time coach Barry Trotz is facing his old team -- and the score is tied at 1. Sitting at a desk, perched in the 100 level, are MSG analyst AJ Mleczko and host Shannon Hogan.
"I'm not surprised there was a lot of jump and energy in this game," Hogan says on the broadcast. "I'm a little surprised it was Valtteri Filppula who scored on the first shot for the Islanders again."
"We talked about him and his whole line, [Leo] Komarov and [Tom] Kuhnhackl, in the pregame," Mleczko says as highlights of the goal cut in. "About how much energy they bring, how many turnovers they create, and Filppula had that beautiful goal against Carolina. But Trotz coming right out with them to start the game, they give up an opportunity, but they're not intimidated by the top line. They jumped right back down."
Behind the cameras, Mleczko knows there are children lined up to catch a glimpse behind the scenes.
"We're very accessible, and there's little girls and little boys up there, but I do think of the little girls," Mleczko says. "They might not realize how cool it is. It may just be normal for them to see two women up there -- to see women talk about men's sports."
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
Mleczko, a former U.S. women's national team standout, was hired this season to do about 20 Islanders broadcasts on MSG Network. She provides analysis pregame and during intermissions, reports from the bench and speaks postgame as well. When Mleczko is not there, she's replaced by Jennifer Botterill, a former Team Canada player and, (somewhat) coincidentally, Mleczko's teammate on the 1999 Harvard Crimson national championship team.
"A two-woman intermission team? It's so great MSG did that," Mleczko says. "I have to imagine it was deliberate to find two women that we could take on this role."
Women have been carving larger roles in sports broadcasts the past few years, though opportunities can still feel limited. The fact that a network has included three women to analyze and report on a men's game feels like a crucial step forward; it quashes any perception that any are simply token hires. Botterill flies in for the games from Toronto; Mleczko comes in from Boston. It's a serious investment and proof that there's room for more than one female voice, especially if the voices are strong.
"Maybe it once seemed that way, but now it's not preposterous at all to have two women on one broadcast team," says Jeff Filippi, MSG Networks senior vice president of programming and production and executive producer. "It just seemed like a good thing. They were both good, they add diversity to our air, which is something that we look for, and they really know their stuff. So far, we couldn't be happier."
Although Mleczko and Botterill shoulder most of the spotlight because of their status as high-profile former players, Hogan's inclusion should not be minimized. "She's been on the scene a couple years," Mleczko says. "She doesn't have the background playing we do, but she certainly knows her stuff."
Of the past 80 teams in playoff position at Thanksgiving, 62 made the postseason. Who will continue the trend? Who will buck it? We check in with all 31.
Cecilie Olsen isn't just working in sports, as was her career aspiration. She's running the show for the Manglerud Star club of GET-ligaen in Norway.
Should it be Bill Zito? Sean Burke? Chuck Fletcher? Gritty? We debate the top candidates, and make our picks.
Mleczko has worked as an analyst for NBC Sports since 2006, and last spring, she became the first woman to work as an in-booth analyst in an NHL postseason game. That caught the attention of MSG executives.
"I can say, 'That was a nice pass.' I thought AJ did a really good job of explaining the hows and whys," Filippi says.
When Mleczko returned from the second round of the playoffs after calling the Winnipeg-Nashville series, she received a call from Jon Ledecky, an Islanders majority owner. Ledecky asked if she would join the broadcast team. Mleczko, who still does part-time work with NBC, was flattered and intrigued. There was only one problem.
She told Ledecky: "I don't live in New York. I live in Boston with my husband and four kids, who are all in school. This won't work."
Ledecky wouldn't relent. He put Mleczko in touch with executives at MSG. They began discussing how they might be able to make the arrangement work, and they settled on a 20-game slate of Islanders home games -- plus two road games in Boston. "The challenges are obvious in terms of logistics," Mleczko says. "Home games are away games for me. I'm away from my family for two nights."
The network, meanwhile, needed someone to fill the remaining slate. Landing on Botterill was serendipitous. "When I stepped away from my life as an elite athlete, I was intrigued about broadcasting right away," Botterill says. "I got some opportunities with Canadian networks, and it has been a really great way to stay connected to the game, to share my perspective and share my stories."
Her agent was looking for more opportunities and contacted MSG. They brought her in for a round of interviews this fall. To complement Mleczko with Botterill just "felt right," Filippi says.
Botterill was a freshman at Harvard when Mleczko was a senior. The 1999 national championship game against New Hampshire went to overtime. Mleczko passed the puck to Botterill for the winning goal. "When I think of AJ, I think of this photo that captures that moment," Botterill says. "I'm literally jumping in the middle of the air, you see the back of her jersey, No. 1 Mleczko. That's the lasting image of our hockey days together."
When Botterill debuted on the broadcast this fall, MSG aired grainy footage of the goal. The two faced off quite a few times on the rival U.S. and Canadian teams. "We were teammates, then we were opponents, but it's much more fun to be teammates again," Mleczko says.
The two have stayed in touch over the years and have seen each other at various hockey events, but as with many college friendships, it was difficult when lives diverged. "Through this whole process, it's just been so great to connect again," Botterill says.
The irony of the setup is they don't get to see each other much, but they have become closer. Over several phone calls, Mleczko has relied on Botterill for advice on the intermission interviews since Botterill has experience doing that -- and Mleczko did not, but she calls it a "good challenge." Since Mleczko started one month earlier -- Botterill had a bit of a delay with her Canadian work visa -- she has shared insight on the simple logistics of the role: how to get from the studio to the bench, which producers to contact about what, etc.
Botterill, who has two children, says she admires Mleczko because "she's a super mom but super professional, too. She has four kids. She balances it all. She's a superwoman in all aspects of her life."
Together, they hope the new venture is a step forward for women.
"I think things have changed significantly [for women in broadcasting], but I still think there's room for improvement," Botterill says. "But huge credit to MSG Network because they clearly have a huge respect for people who understand the game of hockey and can offer an insightful perspective."
Mleczko hopes the CWHL and NWHL get more television air time. The visibility will help grow the game and create even more opportunities for women. But for now?
"Us being on TV," Mleczko says, "I like that it's become a little bit more of the norm."

The NHL has hit the quarter-season mark, and already we've seen some turmoil. Some of the season's biggest early disappointments have not wasted any time making changes to salvage their seasons; four teams (the Blackhawks, Blues, Kings and Oilers) fired their coaches, and the Flyers dismissed GM Ron Hextall. The Golden Knights are missing the juju from their inaugural season, and injuries have piled up for many teams (but it seems especially bad for the Ducks).
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
Then we have the pleasant surprises: The Sabres were a trendy sleeper pick this preseason, but who would have thought Jack Eichel, Jeff Skinner & Co. would produce one of the best records in the Eastern Conference? (With 34 points, Buffalo enters Tuesday ahead of both the Maple Leafs and the Bruins). The Flames are atop the wide-open Pacific Division. The Preds reign in the Central, though last year's ahead-of-schedule surprise, the Avalanche, haven't shown much sign of drop-off. The Hurricanes seem to love being the plucky, young underdogs and celebrating as such.
The past five seasons, 62 of the 80 teams in playoff spots as of American Thanksgiving have gone on to clinch playoff berths. Who will help cement that trend, and who will buck it? Here's a glance at where all 31 teams stand, including their biggest concerns and a bold prediction for how the season will finish.
Read through all 31 teams by division, or skip ahead to your team by clicking on its logo below:

Note: Preseason standings point projections are per the Westgate Las Vegas SuperBook.
Preseason standings point projection: 85.5
Current standings point pace: 89
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Canes might be having the most fun of any team in the NHL right now -- including creating, and defending, their postgame celebrations -- as first-year coach Rod Brind'Amour has his team fighting for a playoff spot in the wide-open Metro.

Biggest concern: The Hurricanes are currently juggling a three-goalie conundrum, which is not sustainable. Carolina will need to make a decision soon; does it have the guts to do something difficult, such as give up on Scott Darling in the second year of a four-year contract?
Bold prediction: The Canes move on from the Darling-as-a-No. 1 experiment by December. Curtis McElhinney and Petr Mrazek give this upstart team the best chance to win.
Preseason standings point projection: 97.5
Current standings point pace: 103
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Blue Jackets seem to be in control. They're getting better secondary production outside Artemi Panarin, including from Cam Atkinson, Josh Anderson, Pierre-Luc Dubois and one of the year's best redemption stories, Anthony Duclair.

Biggest concern: The uncertainty surrounding the futures of Panarin and Sergei Bobrovsky still lingers. It's going to be awkward when this team is pushing for a top playoff seed and has to decide whether to deal one, or two, of its star players.
Bold prediction: Panarin and Bobrovsky both stay past the trade deadline as GM Jarmo Kekalainen decides to go all-in with this group.
Preseason standings point projection: 91.5
Current standings point pace: 78
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Devils sit at the bottom of the Metro, but a run to the top isn't impossible. New Jersey's offense is performing well, and the advanced stats (including a sixth-best expected goals for percentage) say that if the Devils keep playing this way, results will improve.

Biggest concern: It has been a shaky go for Cory Schneider since his return from offseason hip surgery. Keith Kinkaid is a serviceable fill-in, but the Devils could really use Schneider at full form and a better defensive effort in front of him.
Bold prediction: The Devils keep playing hard under John Hynes, clean up the defense and find themselves once again an unlikely playoff team.
Preseason standings point projection: 82.5
Current standings point pace: 93
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Isles might have felt slighted after John Tavares picked the Maple Leafs, but they're doing just fine without him. Turns out, New York's core was sturdier than we thought.

Biggest concern: The Islanders are still sporting a league-high PDO at 5-on-5, and they have already begun to show signs of the inevitable regression to the mean.
Bold prediction: The goaltending duo of Thomas Greiss and Robin Lehner actually holds up. Despite a few shaky performances by each lately, the tandem will become the biggest goaltending success story of the season.
Preseason standings point projection: 75.5
Current standings point pace: 92
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Rebuild? What rebuild? The young, plucky Rangers, under first-year coach David Quinn -- who has an affinity for motivation-through-benching -- are shockingly in the playoff hunt.

Biggest concern: This was all a mirage. Bolstered by some vintage Henrik Lundqvist goaltending and inspired, us-against-the-world-play, the Blueshirts overachieved through the first quarter. But look at the talent level on this roster. Is it really sustainable?
Bold prediction: The Rangers make the playoffs. Not only that, but they make a run, just as they have for the better part of this decade, with a much more seasoned and star-studded roster.
Preseason standings point projection: 97.5
Current standings point pace: 78
No. 1 takeaway thus far: This team is a lot further from a playoff contender than we thought. Of course, goaltending is a huge issue -- this is the Flyers we're talking about here -- but so are the slow starts, a sloppy penalty kill and a lack of consistency. All of it led to the team cutting ties with GM Ron Hextall on Monday.

Biggest concern: The middling combination of Brian Elliott, Michal Neuvirth, Anthony Stolarz, Alex Lyon and Cal Pickard has posted a league-worst .880 save percentage. Top prospect Carter Hart is still adjusting to the pro game in Allentown, which means immediate help is likely not on the way.
Bold prediction: Following the team's firing of Hextall, the new GM makes a bold trade to try to salvage the season. The most likely candidate is 30-year-old winger Wayne Simmonds, who is on the final year of his contract.
The 2016 draft pick is Philly's future franchise goalie. Despite the organization's patience, the 20-year-old wants to accelerate his ascension.
The Blackhawks swapped one first-rounder for two from the Coyotes. Which team came out ahead?
Connor McDavid deserves better than this. Plus, projections on the 2019 playoff field, Gritty's big week, Jersey Fouls of the week and more.
Preseason standings point projection: 102.5
Current standings point pace: 86
No. 1 takeaway thus far: It has been a sluggish start. Impatient GM Jim Rutherford has already made one big trade (swapping Carl Hagelin for Tanner Pearson) and has threatened to shake up his roster even further.

Biggest concern: What's going on with Matt Murray? The 24-year-old netminder is on injury reserve yet again, and he has hardly looked like the No. 1 franchise goaltender the Penguins believe him to be. Pittsburgh, trying to endure a tense time, must lean on the less experienced Casey DeSmith.
Bold prediction: It's pretty obvious that Rutherford still isn't satisfied with the current roster. In need of a defenseman, the GM ships out the popular Bryan Rust.
Preseason standings point projection: 97.5
Current standings point pace: 106
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The band came back together but haven't been able to all play together for most of this season due to injuries and suspensions. Nonetheless, Washington has stayed afloat while Alex Ovechkin (18 goals, one behind the league leaders) laughs at anyone who suggests a Cup hangover, be it real or figurative.

Biggest concern: The defense hasn't been too leaky, but it also hasn't been stellar, with some puck-management issues. The Caps have allowed 3.04 goals per game as Todd Reirden has already tried shuffling pairs to get the group going.
Bold prediction: Braden Holtby is off to a slow start, by his standards, but will heat up this winter and finish top-five in save percentage in the NHL, once again emerging as a Vezina Trophy candidate.
Preseason standings point projection: 102.5
Current standings point pace: 103
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That the Bruins are good enough to win despite having nearly every defenseman on the roster injured in some way, shape or form (or so it would seem). Zdeno Chara, Torey Krug, Charlie McAvoy, Brandon Carlo, Kevan Miller and others have missed time this season. Yet Boston has the second-lowest goals against average in the NHL (2.39). Thanks, team defense and Jaroslav Halak!

Biggest concern: The Bruins were in the bottom third in the league on offense (2.83 goals per game), and being 26th overall in 5-on-5 goals is a big reason why, especially after being in the top 10 in that category last season. The truth is that the Bruins' scoring at forward runs five players deep right now, and that's not what you want to see knowing that the mile-deep Maple Leafs or Lightning could be blocking the road to a championship.
Bold prediction: Despite his early-season struggles, Tuukka Rask ends up with better overall numbers than Halak by season's end.
Postgame analysis and highlight show airing each night throughout the season from Barry Melrose and Linda Cohn. Watch on ESPN+
Preseason standings point projection: 80.5
Current standings point pace: 116
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That the hockey world had to wait far too long for Jeff Skinner to play with an elite center. With all due respect to Victor Rask, Riley Nash, Elias Lindholm and Eric Staal (before he figured out how to be Eric Staal again in Minnesota), playing with Jack Eichel has been revelatory for Skinner, who has 18 goals through 24 games. Yes, Jack has a history of boosting his linemates' shooting percentages. But Skinner went from an 8.7 percent clip to a 22.5 percent clip so far this season. That's incredible.

Biggest concern: There are some underlying metrics that are encouraging, like the fact that this isn't just a ride on the PDO train (the Sabres have a PDO of 100.8, with league average at 100). But they're on the negative side of possession (49.3 Corsi for percentage) and are just a plus-3 in 5-on-5 goal differential. But honestly, the biggest concern is that either Eichel or Skinner goes down with an injury; not only because they have a history of doing so, but because that top line is a such an engine for this team.
Bold prediction: Jeff Skinner's contract situation lingers through the season into the postseason, and the phrase "testing the market" starts to send shivers down Buffalo fans' spines.
Preseason standings point projection: 75.5
Current standings point pace: 79
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That Andreas Athanasiou might finally be something more than a set of wheels. The 24-year-old forward has 10 goals in 19 games, nearly doubling the best goals-per-game mark of his career. On a team still struggling to find total team offense -- at 2.65 goals per game, the Red Wings are 28th in the NHL -- he has been a revelation and a hope for the future.

Biggest concern: That despite some signs of life and early contention, this remains a defensively porous, offensively challenged team that inexplicably has its head pushed up against the salary cap ceiling. OK, "inexplicably" probably isn't correct. It's totally Ken Holland's fault.
Bold prediction: That Jimmy Howard trade we all figured would happen at some point during the last three years finally happens at the trade deadline, with the Wings picking up part of the salary tab.
Preseason standings point projection: 94.5
Current standings point pace: 82
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That expectation is not execution. The Panthers were picked by many (raises hand) to have a breakout season, but through 21 games they're last in the Eastern Conference. Most of this is due to their defense, in the sense that they haven't played much of it: 3.62 goals allowed per game, which is second only to Ottawa through 21 games. Only four Panthers who have played at least 15 games have a positive goal differential at 5-on-5.

Biggest concern: Much of this defensive failure tracks back to their goaltending, as James Reimer, Roberto Luongo and Michael Hutchinson have combined for an .884 team save percentage, second worst in the NHL to the Flyers, who just fired their general manager.
Bold prediction: The Panthers catch fire and rally to make the Eastern Conference playoffs as a wild-card team, because I hate being wrong.
Preseason standings point projection: 80.5
Current standings point pace: 92
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That apparently Max Domi and Tomas Tatar had a bit more to offer. Acquired from the Coyotes for Alex Galchenyuk, Domi has 26 points in his first 24 games, including 11 goals, surpassing his total from last season (nine). Acquired in the Max Pacioretty trade, Tatar has 10 goals in 24 games for the Habs, or two more than Pacioretty has with Vegas.

Biggest concern: Carey Price. Which is a weird thing to say when the Habs are on the wild-card bubble and exceeding expectations. But frankly, they're winning despite Price, who has a minus-6.28 goals saved above average and a .902 even-strength save percentage.
Bold prediction: The Canadiens sell high on Andrew Shaw at the trade deadline.
Preseason standings point projection: 69.5
Current standings point pace: 72
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That bad can be good. There have been few teams this season as entertaining as the Ottawa Senators, who are third in the NHL in goals scored per game (3.61) but last in the NHL in goals allowed per game by a country mile (4.35). And that's just on the ice: Who knew that the cyberbullying scandal from earlier this calendar year was just the appetizer for the "players talking smack on an Uber camera" and "team potentially creating Twitter sock puppets to defend beleaguered owner" scandals?

Biggest concern: That the Senators continue to run hot and cold and don't finish with the league's worst record in a rebuilding year. Wait, sorry ... that's actually Avalanche GM Joe Sakic's biggest concern about the Senators, since Colorado owns their 2019 first-rounder.
Bold prediction: Matt Duchene parlays his contract-year success into a long-term deal with the Senators worth eight years and $8.3 million annually.
Preseason standings point projection: 107.5
Current standings point pace: 120
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Depth, depth and more depth. How the Lightning looked on paper entering the season is how they've played, as Nikita Kucherov, Brayden Point, Yanni Gourde, Steven Stamkos, J.T. Miller, Tyler Johnson and Ryan McDonagh -- having a Norris Trophy-worthy season, according to coach Jon Cooper -- are all 17 points or better through 24 games. Cooper's like a chef with access to gourmet ingredients: No matter how many times he changes the recipe through his frequent line scrambling, the results are scrumptious, to the tune of 3.79 goals per game, the best in the NHL through 24 games.

Biggest concern: That the lessons they're learning this season on defense aren't applied in the postseason. The Lightning have made a concerted effort to be a more complete defensive team in front of (currently injured) goalie Andrei Vasilevskiy. It's going to be the key to winning those marathon Eastern Conference final series they've lost in two of the last three seasons, in the sense that a stronger and more confident structure can end those series before they reach a sphincter-clenching seventh game.
Bold prediction: Brayden Point leads the Bolts in goals and, as is tradition, Professional Hockey Writers Association voters finally recognize him for his defense with a Selke Trophy nomination.
Preseason standings point projection: 106.5
Current standings point pace: 112
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Leafs are 8-5 without the injured Auston Matthews in the lineup, and 16-8-0 without William Nylander in the lineup, as the latter's contract situation has kept him off the ice for the entirety of the season. Mitch Marner has 30 points in 24 games, while John Tavares had 15 goals in 24 games. This is a team that had considerable depth, but one that has shown an impressive perspicacity for handling adversity.

Biggest concern: The defensive corps still remains the weakest part of the roster. Only two Maple Leafs defensemen are on the positive side of the shot-attempts counter at 5-on-5 (Travis Dermott, Igor Ozhiganov); and while their shots against per game are down about a shot per game from last season, their goalies are still seeing 32.7 shots against per contest.
Bold prediction: William Nylander signs before Saturday's deadline, and all this chatter about how this very specific situation affecting one specific team is somehow a harbinger of doom for other teams facing second contracts comes to an end.
Preseason standings point projection: 85.5
Current standings point pace: 79
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Blackhawks' dramatic firing coach of Joel Quenneville 15 games into the season (and promotion of 33-year-old Jeremy Colliton) means the team is looking to the future, though management is reluctant to embrace a full rebuild just yet.

Biggest concern: The team stays stuck in neutral. The hodgepodge roster of an aging star core and unseasoned young talent can't keep up with more balanced teams, and the Blackhawks lose relevance in a competitive market.
Bold prediction: GM Stan Bowman finds a way to take one of his unmovable contracts off the books; most likely (and conservatively), it's center Artem Anisimov, who has a limited no-trade clause and is an attractive middle-six option for teams in the playoff hunt.
The 2016 draft pick is Philly's future franchise goalie. Despite the organization's patience, the 20-year-old wants to accelerate his ascension.
The Blackhawks swapped one first-rounder for two from the Coyotes. Which team came out ahead?
Connor McDavid deserves better than this. Plus, projections on the 2019 playoff field, Gritty's big week, Jersey Fouls of the week and more.
Preseason standings point projection: 89.5
Current standings point pace: 107
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Avalanche continue to be plucky overachievers. They're propelled by the spectacular top line of Nathan MacKinnon, Mikko Rantanen and Gabriel Landeskog, though youngsters are stepping up (and developing nicely). Meanwhile, the platoon of Semyon Varlamov and Philipp Grubauer is going as well as expected.

Biggest concern: The Avalanche have had no trouble with scoring, with the league's second-best offense (3.74 goals per game). They also have the league's highest shooting percentage, meaning they've been at least a bit lucky.
Bold prediction: Last season, the top line willed this team into the playoffs without much secondary production. The gap will shrink as the season progresses, as players such as Alexander Kerfoot and J.T. Compher (who missed time with a head injury) begin to find their groove.
Preseason standings point projection: 94.5
Current standings point pace: 89
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Stars have been hit by the injury bug, especially on the blue line, and have endured some inconsistencies (including a 12-game goalless drought from Tyler Seguin) but remain well-positioned for a playoff spot.

Biggest concern: Streakiness is expected with a new coach implementing yet another new system, but the diminishing power play (the Stars have scored only five power-play goals in the past 52 opportunities) feels inexcusable.
Bold prediction: Hey, the Calder Trophy will probably go to a forward, as per usual, and likely Vancouver's Elias Pettersson. But if Miro Heiskanen keeps up his strong play, the 19-year-old defenseman could actually make it a race.
Preseason standings point projection: 95.5
Current standings point pace: 107
No. 1 takeaway thus far: First-year GM Paul Fenton barely tweaked the roster, and the team he inherited is still quite good. There's a lot to like about this team, including ascending stars such as Matt Dumba (leading all defensemen with 10 goals and averaging nearly as much ice time as yeoman Ryan Suter).

Biggest concern: Last season, the Wild were waiting for Charlie Coyle and Nino Niederreiter to flex the talent they have always promised. Now it seems both players are still trending in the wrong direction.
Bold prediction: It's a star turn for Mikael Granlund -- continuing the NHL's big trend of the Year of the Finns -- and the 26-year-old finishes top-20 in scoring.
Preseason standings point projection: 105.5
Current standings point pace: 120
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Rinse, wash, repeat. Even with a few recent injuries (the biggest: Viktor Arvidsson out at least a month), the Predators have the best record in the Western Conference, with a whopping plus-23 goal differential.

Biggest concern: How can a team so talented be so ineffective on the power play? The Predators have the third-worst power play in the league (15.2 percent). Last season, with virtually the same roster, Nashville hit on 21.2 percent of its opportunities.
Bold prediction: Kevin Fiala shakes off his season-long slump to become the secondary scoring hero the Predators need to win yet another Presidents' Trophy.
Preseason standings point projection: 96.5
Current standings point pace: 71
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Blues are one of the NHL's biggest quarter-season disappointments. A summer of bold moves by GM Doug Armstrong has not panned out, as the built-to-win-now Blues are sitting near the bottom of the division, with fired coach Mike Yeo the casualty.

Biggest concern: Even with the coaching change, the group has trouble putting up consistent effort on a game-to-game basis. That's problematic because the talent level on this roster is good enough to be competing for a top playoff spot.
Bold prediction: He has threatened this before, but Armstrong finally shakes up the roster with a trade of a core player. Who would be truly shocking? Vladimir Tarasenko? Alex Pietrangelo? One of the top young players such as Robert Thomas?
Preseason standings point projection: 106.5
Current standings point pace: 104
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Maple Leafs might shoulder most of the attention, but the Jets are probably the Canadian team with the best chance of ending the country's 25-year Stanley Cup drought. The Jets have begun 2018-19 right where they left off last spring.

Biggest concern: On the surface, the Jets don't have trouble finding offense -- ranking eighth in the league, scoring 3.36 goals per game and with the league's top power play -- but 5-on-5 scoring hasn't been totally dominant, and the team needs more production from bottom-six forwards.
Bold prediction: Patrik Laine can be streaky, and he's just heating up now. A scorching December puts the Finn ahead in the goal-scoring race for good, and he runs away with the Rocket Richard Trophy.
Preseason standings point projection: 94.5
Current standings point pace: 82
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That John Gibson deserves to be leading the Hart Trophy and Vezina Trophy races, given that his .926 save percentage and 2.57 goals-against average defy how disastrous these Ducks have been in almost every other underlying metric.

Biggest concern: Pick your poison. Being the second-worst team in possession, ahead of only Ottawa? Being the second-worst team in goal differential, ahead of only Los Angeles? Being carried to playoff contention by a goalie who can't be expected to do it all on his own?
Bold prediction: Randy Carlyle is a losing streak away from being fired. That streak hits before the All-Star break.
Preseason standings point projection: 81.5
Current standings point pace: 75
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Why can't the offense and the defense be on the same page? The Coyotes get solid goaltending from Antti Raanta and Darcy Kuemper, to the tune of a 2.82 goals-against average. But their offense is sputtering, with 2.36 goals per game, 28th in the NHL.

Biggest concern: Offense, offense and offense. Their power play stinks (15.5 percent). They didn't have a player with more than 14 points at the 22-game mark. The trade of Dylan Strome and Brendan Perlini for Nick Schmaltz was symbolic of the Coyotes' desire to stop waiting on potential and start demanding results.
Bold prediction: In two years, we're calling it simply "The Max Domi Trade."
Catch more than 180 NHL games streaming live this season on ESPN+. Click here for the upcoming schedule and to learn how to subscribe.
Preseason standings point projection: 93.5
Current standings point pace: 99
No. 1 takeaway thus far: The Flames are getting oodles of offense from the line of Johnny Gaudreau (27 points), Sean Monahan (26 points) and Elias Lindholm, who has 11 goals and is fitting in exactly as GM Brad Treliving envisioned it. Then there's the season Matthew Tkachuk is having with usual partner in crime Mikael Backlund, as he has 12 goals and 15 assists in 24 games. Let's not forget defenseman Mark Giordano, who has 22 points in 24 games. The Flames have beaten opponents by three or more goals seven times.

Biggest concern: The Flames are at 2.83 goals allowed per game -- middle of the pack in the league -- which is a tribute to the play of "Big Save" Dave Rittich, who has a .953 even-strength save percentage while Mike Smith remains sub-.900. Our faith in the Calgary goaltending isn't exactly high; hey, it wouldn't be the first Bill Peters team subverted by lackluster netminding.
Bold prediction: Noah Hanifin outscores Dougie Hamilton on the season.
Preseason standings point projection: 89.5
Current standings point pace: 78
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That Todd McLellan was totally to blame for this team's inadequacies, and hence had to pay for it with his job. This is silly, of course, because the Oilers' problems are due to construction and not coaching. And when that's the case, you just throw some Ken Hitchcock at the problem and see what happens if you're GM Peter Chiarelli.

Biggest concern: That Hitchcock can't work his usual magic defensively for the Oilers, who are saddled by lackluster goaltending and a penalty kill ranked 27th in the NHL.
Bold prediction: Please don't make me do the "Connor McDavid would totally be the MVP were it not for the Oilers missing the playoffs" thing again. I'm so tired of that thing.
Preseason standings point projection: 92.5
Current standings point pace: 61
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Boy, that escalated quickly, huh? John Stevens was fired after a 4-8-1 start that saw Jonathan Quick limited to just four appearances due to injury. In comes Willie Desjardins, who decides to play Ilya Kovalchuk under seven minutes per game while going 4-6-0 to start his stint. Kovalchuk, by the way, has 14 points to lead the team as well as a minus-13, second to Dion Phaneuf's minus-14. Their combined age is 68.

Biggest concern: We're going to need the world's largest dart board and about a thousand Post-it notes with the Kings' issues on them. OK, here we go. [Throws dart] Anze Kopitar has gone from the best offensive year of his life to his worst points-per-game average. [Throws dart] Tanner Pearson has three goals in six games in Pittsburgh after having one assist in 17 games in L.A., which necessitated his trade. [Throws dart] The Kings look old on paper, and play even older.
Bold prediction: Say, Ron Hextall needs a job ...
Preseason standings point projection: 101.5
Current standings point pace: 96
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That this is a veteran group with some significant improvements -- see Timo Meier's 13 goals and Erik Karlsson getting back to being Erik Karlsson -- on its journey back to challenging for that elusive Stanley Cup. Their most impressive stat might be that they're jumping on teams in the first period, to the tune of a plus-12 goal differential in that frame.

Biggest concern: Martin Jones. The Sharks have an overall team save percentage of .895, which is bad; his .881 even-strength save percentage in 16 starts is even worse. GM Doug Wilson put the team's faith in Jones to be a championship-caliber goalie. But goalies who have a minus-7.85 goals saved above average are not that, and alas that's where Jones is right now.
Bold prediction: The Sharks win the Pacific.
Preseason standings point projection: 77.5
Current standings point pace: 76
No. 1 takeaway thus far: That the future is bright. The Canucks have come back down to earth after a blistering start, but that's OK. Between Elias Pettersson's Calder Trophy campaign (13 goals), Bo Horvat's 22-point performance, the quality play of Nikolay Goldobin and "Shotgun" Jake Virtanen, and the continued burgeoning stardom of Brock Boeser (when healthy), there's a lot here to keep Canucks fans watching, even as their team slips deeper into the lottery again despite some impressive coaching from Travis Green, who's the real deal.

Biggest concern: Shot generation. Vancouver is at 28.2 shots for per game, which is 28th in the NHL. That should improve with Boeser back in the lineup, but it's also an indication that the depth still isn't there for Vancouver.
Bold prediction: Alexander Edler does the old "deadline trade, only to re-sign with his old team next season" routine.
Preseason standings point projection: 101.5
Current standings point pace: 82
No. 1 takeaway thus far: Lightning is really hard to capture twice in a bottle. The Golden Knights are admirably still in the hunt despite losing free-agent prize Paul Stastny three games into the season, missing No. 1 defenseman Nate Schmidt for 20 games due to suspension, and seeing the general regression for everything from William Karlsson's goal-scoring (he's on pace for about 20 goals, down from 43) to their ability to overwhelm teams (they have a minus-1) goal differential. But a meek division means they're very much still in it.
Biggest concern: The Knights' power play is still adjusting to the personnel changes (and early-season manpower losses), clicking at 17.8 percent, down from 21.4 percent last season. Most concerning: It's just 15.2 percent at home, 26th in the NHL, down from 10th last season (24.2).
Bold prediction: The Golden Knights get rolling again and make the playoff cut.

Kendall Coyne, left, Hilary Knight and the U.S. women's hockey team know their fight for equal pay and increased exposure doesn't end with a gold medal in the Olympics.
CHICAGO -- To everyone who followed the U.S. women's hockey team's boycott and fight for equality last year, for everyone who tuned into Team USA's thrilling Olympic gold-medal win over Canada in February and to everyone who cheered for the women immediately when they returned home, veteran forward Hilary Knight has a message:
"We're in hockey rinks, not only every four years, but every single day. We're trying to make the game more accessible to everyone in various markets. But try to go out of your way to watch us at the same time. Because we're definitely not done yet."
In March 2017, the players boycotted the world championship, seeking equal treatment as their male counterparts. The players and USA Hockey agreed to a new deal days before the tournament began.
This week, the U.S. women will play in their first post-Olympic tournament, in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. It's the Four Nations Cup, an annual competition that pits the United States against Canada, Finland and Sweden. The U.S. roster in Saskatoon will feature 16 members of the 2018 Olympic team and a new coaching staff.



U.S. women's hockey team isn't done fighting for more equality

The U.S. women's hockey team continues fight for equality

Rivals on USA, Canada hockey teams marry

The USWNT honors the USWNT

Will the silver spell be broken for U.S. women's hockey?

A weeklong training camp in Chicago was the first time the team had worked with coach Bob Corkum and assistants Brian Pothier and Joel Johnsson. Reagan Carey, director of women's hockey for Team USA, stepped down last week after eight years on the job.
Players said speed and puck possession are still signature focal points, though Knight explained, "You'll see a different Team USA. The coaching staff has different systems, different techniques. We're all students of the game, so we're all extremely excited to get different looks."
The rival Canadians will have 14 players from their Pyeongchang Games silver-medal team, and as usual, the U.S. can't wait for that game.
"Especially playing Canada in Canada -- there's no other place I'd rather play them," Knight said. "The barn is always packed."
The U.S. has not lost an international tournament since 2014, but this is the first competition in the team's new reality.
"The last 20 years as a program, we've been chasing," forward Kendall Coyne said. "We know what it's like to be on the other side of things. Knowing that feeling, we know they're going to come out hard."
And yet with as much progress as the women made at the Olympics, the women are still working toward one of their biggest goals: visibility. The Four Nations Cup won't be broadcast on U.S. television. Games can be found online, streaming on HockeyTV. TSN will broadcast the bronze- and gold-medal games in Canada.
Though the women enjoyed an immediate PR push after the Olympics -- a two week publicity tour included visits to various NHL arenas and appearances on "The Ellen Show" and "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" -- players say some individual opportunities remain, but overall attention has waned over the past few months, as has often been cyclical with the sport.
"We put in the same work the NHLers do, we care, we love and work just as hard for this game," Coyne said. "It's unfortunate our games aren't as easily accessible as some other games -- men's games, for example -- but I hope people realize when they have an opportunity to watch a women's hockey game, they should. That will only encourage more coverage."
Another reminder of how far women's hockey has to come: just how excited some players were to come to the training camp, held at the Chicago Blackhawks training facility. Working with USA Hockey is the most structure that the majority of the postgrad players get in their training.
"As much as we are athletes, we are also our own GMs, we are our own coaches on the ice, we are our own teammates even -- we're the ones that verbally encourage ourselves on the ice and visualize our teammates out there because a lot of us have to skate by ourselves," said Gigi Marvin, the team's oldest player at 31. "I have to pay seven bucks to get my skate sharpened. I have to go buy my tape. I have to bring my own pucks. I don't have a locker room to keep my gear in. It's the simple little things. When I come to the rink [at training camp], it's like, holy cow, how nice is it I don't have to bring my whole bag home. If we lose an edge, we don't need to get off; we can give our skates to our equipment guy to sharpen them, and he'll sharpen them."
Six U18 players were invited to the camp as part of their development, though they will not play in the tournament. Knight singled out Dominique Petrie, a Harvard freshman, as a player who impressed. Eleven players on the Four Nations Cup team currently play college hockey, including Minnesota-Duluth goaltender Maddie Rooney, who started all but one game in the Olympic tournament.
The goal next week is another tournament win, but Marvin doesn't want to undersell the importance of Olympic gold.
"It changes everything," Marvin said. "After the boycott, we went full into training, and everything was about the Olympics. We didn't really get time to reflect on it. Coming home and being able to celebrate with everyone and tell our story, we finally got to take a minute to realize how important this was. It was super important -- not just for us, but for our sport."

TORONTO -- He isn't saying much. Actually, nothing at all. Ben Azegere is sitting in a suite in the 200 level of Scotiabank Arena on Thursday night, sipping on orange juice and eating popcorn, taking it all in. Imagine if your first NHL game ever was in Toronto, as the hometown Maple Leafs are the hottest ticket in hockey. Imagine if they're hosting Sidney Crosby and the Penguins.
Actually, imagine if this is the first full NHL game you'll watch ever in your life. The fluorescent lights, the stars cycling on and off the ice, the sheer volume of the national anthem; it's a lot to take in.
The 33-year-old Azegere is the captain of the Ice Lions, Kenya's men's hockey team. Their story went viral last week, as part of a Tim Hortons campaign. The company learned that the Ice Lions are the only team in the entire country and have nobody to play but themselves. So over the summer, they were flown out to Canada and surprised with two new teammates for one epic scrimmage: Crosby and Colorado Avalanche star Nathan MacKinnon. Tim Hortons made the video into a one-minute spot; it had more than a million views within days.
Now Azegere is back in Toronto, doing a bit of a media tour. It culminates with this game and, wearing his kelly green jersey and jeans, he's absorbing it all.
 Kenyan men's ice hockey captain Ben Azegere (of viral Tim Horton's video fame) reunites with a fan.
A post shared by  Emily Kaplan (@emilymkaplan) on Oct 19, 2018 at 7:28am PDT
He watches as the players expertly hop over the bench to switch shifts (at his home rink, there aren't even boards). His head swivels back and forth as Auston Matthews carries the puck the length of the ice (the Kenyan rink is about two thirds of the size of NHL regulation ice). He does let out one "ahh" when Penguins goaltender Matt Murray makes a blocker save. The Ice Lions don't have a goaltender, in part because they don't have any goaltending equipment "and come on, that's too dangerous," he says. Instead, they put a toy penguin in the net. To score, you have to hit the penguin above the belly.
When asked what he thinks of the game, halfway through the first period, Azegere simply says: "I'm just loving it, loving it all." But Azegere doesn't really want to talk about himself. For him, this experience is more about the message he can share. He knows his story has blown up -- though it seems like he doesn't have a total grasp of just how viral -- but to anyone who watched the video, he hopes they realize this: "Anything is possible," he says. "And every dream is valid."
Like many Kenyans, Azegere's first love was soccer, and then rugby. He played in Kenya's premier soccer league but knew in a country of 49 million, there were hundreds, probably thousands of talented soccer players and his dream of breaking through to the highest level was slim. He watched the 2010 Vancouver Olympics and became enamored by the ice hockey games.
Meet Tasha Otieno, Faith Wambui and Alexcy Wambui. They are part of the Nairobi Ice Lions -- the sole women's hockey squad in Kenya -- and they are fighting for a place in the sport they love.
Around the same time, Tim Colby, a Canadian living in Kenya, was working to establish a hockey program. There is one hockey rink in Kenya, and it sits in the Panari Hotel in Nairobi, which is adjacent to the famous Nairobi National Park, a sprawling conservatory that's home to giraffes, rhinos, lions and zebras. It's believed to be the only ice rink in East Africa. The rink is mostly used for recreational skating, but members of the Canadian embassy started coming by and donating sticks and pucks.
Azegere began coming by, too. The first time he took the ice he said it felt like "a soapy floor." But he was hooked. Soon after, the Ice Lions were formed. "I wish I had started playing 20 years ago," Azegere says. "I love the sport. One day, that will be possible for Kenyans, and people will start at a young age like they do in Canada."
Azegere estimates there are only 30 ice hockey players in his entire country, and you probably should take his word. The ice rink's management hired him on staff and he's keenly aware of everyone who stops by. The team plays on Wednesday nights and Saturdays, and usually convene on a Facebook group beforehand to make sure there's enough players to come out. There are women who play there too, and Azegere said he would love for the women's team to become full-fledged soon.
Even with help from the Canadians, equipment is hard to come by. Azegere has two pairs of skates now, and he's got a few sticks. But when a stick breaks, it's not like he can make a run to the local sporting goods store and buy a new one. A lot of the equipment is outdated; he recalls when a puck hit one of his teammates skates recently and the blade just peeled off. Azegere wears soccer shin guards, which are quite thin and only cover his shins. Some of his teammates are known to get pieces of couch cushions and tape them to themselves.
Like the rest of the world, many find the sport cost-prohibitive. Since the sport is foreign to many in Africa, they also have to battle perceptions. "People question the violence of hockey," Azegere says. "Because they only see the hitting and the fighting." He knows if enough people will just try it, they'll see the beauty in it that he does, and that those two attributes hardly define the modern game.
Tim Hortons found out about the Ice Lions in April via an agency they were working with. The idea to fly the Ice Lions out to Canada was a quick elevator pitch that was almost immediately greenlit.
"They just told us the story of this team," says Jana Goodbaum, Tim Hortons lead of global brand image. "We were so, so inspired by their devotion, for their passion for the game, for playing hockey despite all odds."
Tim Hortons presented the idea to Crosby and MacKinnon, who have worked with the company for years, and both said yes. "It was a really cool experience for Sid and I," MacKinnon said. "The pure excitement that they had ... especially for Sid. They said they knew who I was, but I'm not sure that they did. But it was really cool. Some of them were crying."
In the video, one player is shown stroking Crosby's face; he said he needed to feel the superstar's face to know he was real.
The game took place in August, at a rink just outside Toronto in Brampton, Ontario. The Ice Lions arrived at 8 a.m. and were fitted for new equipment and skates, which were later shipped to Kenya. Azegere said it was the first time he ever put on a full set of proper pads, which took adjusting. The skates were a little stiff, but he didn't mind. The opponents were a team of local firefighters. Tim Hortons wanted to give the team the "full Canadian experience," so they gave them a mini-tour of Toronto, which included a visit to the Hockey Hall of Fame and the Stanley Cup.
Azegere figured he'd probably never see Crosby again. And then he came to Scotiabank Arena on Thursday for a morning skate. He sat in the stands and took out his iPhone to film. He needs to show this back to the guys at home. Azegere gets most of his drills from YouTube videos. That's how he consumes most of his hockey, just by highlights and clips. Buying a package to watch live NHL games would cost about 70,000 Kenyan Shillings (or $700 U.S. dollars), Azegere figures, which is too expensive. Plus, there's a time element. He points to the dual clocks on his phone to show that it's 2 a.m. at home when this Leafs-Penguins game begins.
He's most impressed by the sheer size of the arena. "In my dreams," he says. "There will be a place like this in Kenya one day." After the skate, Azegere is brought to the lower concourse for a surprise. He walks out where Crosby is waiting for him. "You're back!" Crosby says, as the men share a hug. Crosby hands him a Penguins jersey and shares a private conversation with Azegere in the locker room. Before they say goodbye, Crosby says: "Have fun tonight, tell all the guys I said hi." Then one more piece of advice: "Don't cheer too hard -- you're in Toronto."
Look who is at Maple Leafs morning skate: Ben Azegere, captain of the Kenyan Ice Lions (and of viral Tim Hortons video fame). "I love the drills, the energy," he said. Back home, he learns most of his drills from YouTube, so says this is a treat.
Azegere spent the rest of his day Thursday walking around Toronto. He was wearing his jersey, so he was recognized often. "I love you guys!" one man shouts as he passes Azegere on the sidewalk. When one man asks for Azegere to take a photo with his son, he says, "That video reminded me why I fell love the game in the first place."
Azegere knows his life may be a bit different now. He's taken to the top of the CN Tower, one of Toronto's most famous landmarks, and while he takes in the scene, he's distracted by a text he got on his phone. "Look," he says, as he shows me a screenshot. "This is the biggest newspaper in our country." The headline on the article: "Kenya's Ice Lions impress NHL stars." He later receives another text, that when he returns home, the President of Kenya wants to meet him.
It's been a whirlwind trip, and Azegere is looking forward to getting back. He has a son born a month ago, and he also has a daughter under the age of 2. There's something he can't wait for: to get his daughter on skates.

The girlfriend of suspended Nashville Predators forward Austin Watson released a statement on Saturday saying the incident that occurred between the two in June "was not an act of domestic violence."
Watson pleaded no contest in July to a misdemeanor domestic assault charge. Watson initially received a 27-game suspension from NHL commissioner Gary Bettman, although it was reduced to 18 games by a neutral arbitrator last week.
On June 16, a witness flagged down a police officer to a gas station in Franklin, Tennessee, where Watson and his girlfriend, Jenn Guardino, were in a parked car. Watson told police he and Guardino were arguing and that he pushed her. Officers said they found red marks on her chest, and she said Watson caused them.
In her statement, Guardino wrote, "Austin Watson has never, and would never hit or abuse me. My behavior and state of intoxication led to the police being involved that day."
Guardino also wrote that she has "struggled with alcoholism for many years" and is actively involved in Alcoholics Anonymous.
"I am fortunate to have Austin's continued support with my treatment," Guardino wrote. "We handled matters poorly on June 16th and know that we need to make better decisions going forward. I take full responsibility for my actions on that day."
Guardino also apologized to "everyone involved for the negative attention that followed this incident, including the Nashville Predators community and the city of Nashville."
A Predators spokesperson said the team was aware Guardino was going to release a statement on Saturday.
The statement comes a day after the NHL released its own statement, saying it was disappointed with the arbitrator's decision to reduce Watson's suspension.
"We firmly believe that the right of appeal to an arbitrator of League discipline was never intended to substitute the arbitrator's judgment for that of the Commissioner, particularly on matters of important League policy and the articulation of acceptable standards of conduct for individuals involved in the National Hockey League," the statement read.
The NHL doesn't have a written domestic violence policy and evaluates each situation on a case-by-case basis.
Watson, 26, is a former first-round draft pick and has played his entire career with the Predators. He is eligible to return Nov. 15 when the Predators visit the Arizona Coyotes.

Her safety belt clicked shut. As her highly public and emotionally draining civil trial entered a weekend break, Erin Andrews sunk into her seat, wishful that her flight—Nashville to Minneapolis to visit her boyfriend—would allow for two hours of solitude. Not so. Her seat neighbor kept glancing over.
“It’s horrible,” Andrews says. “Anytime I’m in a situation where I feel like I’m being stared at, I’m paranoid, I get defensive, I’m on edge. I’ve created this situation where I always wonder, Has that person seen me naked?” Andrews noticed her neighbor Googling her name. Her stomach dropped. Is he going to search for the video? Instead he sent a text:
“OMG I’m sitting next to Erin Andrews.”
A few seconds later, the reply: “Hahaha wow. I can’t believe she’s actually on a public plane. I thought she was scared of big crowds.”
Andrews snapped out of her gaze. “Hey,” she said, sternly. “I’m a real person, you know.”
The man fumbled with his phone as he stashed it into his pocket.
“I’m so sorry,” he told her. “I really didn’t mean that.”
“That’s O.K.,” she replied. “It’s just, things like that bring me pain.”
Andrews first shared this story in June. Earlier this month, as she sipped coffee in a hotel lobby the day before covering a playoff game in Green Bay, she was reminded of the incident. She fiddled with her cup through the retelling, at one point wincing. “I know it’s not healthy,” she says, her voice low and apologetic. “It’s something I’m working on. I feel like I have to win every battle. I feel like I have to prove to people that this has hurt me in ways that you probably can’t see.”
* * *

In 2008 a stalker followed Andrews to a hotel in Nashville. Michael David Barrett filmed her by altering the peephole in the door to her room. At her civil trial last winter, she relived the incident in horrific detail. Jurors screened the footage. A computer scientist, summoned by Andrews’s lawyers, estimated that 16.8 million people had seen images from the video. Andrews’s father testified that once the footage hit the Internet, he feared for his daughter’s safety. “After I saw what was happening,” Steve Andrews testified, “I thought, There’s a stalker out there that could easily kill her.”
The images of Andrews at her civil trial—she brought a $75 million lawsuit against Barrett and West End Hotel Partners and Windsor Capital Group (the two companies that manage the Nashville Marriott) for negligence—were occasionally jarring. Her eyes were puffy from crying; at one point she broke out in hives. But if you look at photos of Andrews entering the courtroom, you see a woman with a game face. She’s pissed—pissed that people treated her case as a joke, pissed that her family had to be dragged into it. On the day she had to testify, Andrews walked onto the stand stoic but angry. “I thought of people in sports I admire,” she says. “I was channeling Bill Belichick and Nick Saban. I said, ‘How would the Packers’ offensive line walk up to the stand right now?’ ”

During the closing arguments Andrews’s lawyer methodically laid out every mistake the hotel made, every action that enabled Barrett’s crime. Andrews sat on the bench, sandwiched between one of her lawyers and a paralegal. “I was on the verge of tears,” she says. “But I was scared that if I started to breathe, the jury would hear me sobbing.” And so Andrews counted to 10, in the most calming way she could imagine. Who is a player who wears number 1? Cam Newton. Two? Matt Ryan. Three? Russell Wilson. . . . Soon, it was over.

* * *
A few days after the images of Andrews hit the Internet in 2009, the case came across the desk of Wesley Hsu, chief of the Cyber and Intellectual Property Crimes unit at the U.S. Attorney’s office in Los Angeles. “We knew a crime was committed,” Hsu says. “We just didn’t know what the crime was. We needed to analyze where it fit in our criminal justice system.”
Once the FBI confirmed that Barrett filmed video at two different hotels, meaning it was a pattern, Hsu identified the case as a potential violation of the Violence Against Women Act, specifically of its stalking statute.
“Although there were a lot of state stalking laws, this particular portion of the Violence Against Women Act had not been used, as far as I can tell, in this manner,” Hsu says. “The stalking statute talks about crossing interstate lines to do certain things, usually if you actually physically harm people.” In Andrews’s case, Barrett didn’t have any intention of approaching her, and yet Hsu prosecuted anyway—and won. In March 2010 Barrett was sentenced to 30 months in prison.
In the seven years since, Hsu has become a leader in cyber crime prosecution, specifically pertaining to what he calls emotional hacking. In 2012 he prosecuted Christopher Chaney, who hacked the emails of dozens of celebrities including Mila Kunis and Scarlett Johansson, then leaked nude photos. Chaney was sentenced to 10 years in jail.
“At the time of Erin’s case, there were certain segments that were of the opinion, Well, what was the harm really?” Hsu says. “[Some] even said it was good for her career. But I believe her case, plus the Chaney case, has helped sway public perception because of their magnitude. Our office has done many cases involving the involuntary posting of images, famous or not, and I can say, uniformly, judges are now taking them very seriously.”
There is room for growth. Technology is changing faster than public policy. Laws vary from state to state. There are loopholes that allow many video voyeurism and cyberstalking cases to slip through.
Some solace for Andrews came in the form of the civil-trial verdict, delivered last March. The jury determined that both Barrett and the management companies were liable for Andrews’s distress; she was awarded $55 million in damages. (The management companies appealed, and then settled the case in April for an undisclosed amount.) She felt empowered, she says, by “fighting for victims who don’t have the resources I have.
“There’s somewhere I can fit in here, I just need to figure out where. I want to get in front of Congress; I want to get in front of lawmakers in D.C.; I want to try to strengthen laws. I just need to find the right group to align myself with. I’m making that my project once the Super Bowl is over.”
Throughout the trial, Andrews was comforted by support from her broadcasting team’s otherwise all-male crew (Aikman sent an inspirational text each morning) and by how many men in professional sports extended encouragement. Andrews received dozens of messages from the likes of Seattle Seahawks linebacker Bobby Wagner, Kansas City Royals manager Ned Yost and Ohio State coach Urban Meyer. (Meyer’s text on the day of the verdict: “[My wife] Shelley and I have been thinking about you. Justice served.”)
“Football is such a huge part of my life,” Andrews says. “It helped me get through the trial. On the witness stand, I said being on the field is ‘my happiness, my escape,’ and I truly believe that. I couldn’t wait to return to the sideline.”

* * *

The checkup, last June, was otherwise routine.
“After the trial,” Andrews says, “I felt the need to simplify my life.” So, in negotiating her new contract with Fox, Andrews requested to be taken off MLB coverage so she could focus solely on the NFL.
Four months later, Andrews was in a meeting at the Giants’ team facility on the Saturday morning before the Week 3 game between New York and Washington. Her doctor’s number popped up on her phone. Andrews excused herself. She was calling with the results of the follow-up tests, which were now conclusive: cervical cancer.


Surgery was scheduled for Tuesday, Oct. 11. Before she was wheeled into the operating room at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, Andrews gave strict orders to her oncologist: “I’m not watching any football games at home. This is [Fox’s] Super Bowl year, and I’m not missing the Super Bowl.”
“Let’s not worry about that right now,” said Stoll, who was by her side. “Let’s just get you better.”
Andrews wouldn’t back down. “You wouldn’t miss a game,” she told Stoll, who played 13 seasons in the NHL. “You’d play through any injury, do whatever it takes to get back out there. That’s going to be me.”
On a Thursday night, two days after the surgery, Andrews was on a red-eye from L.A. to Green Bay. She filmed a feature with Packers wideout Jordy Nelson on Friday morning. That Sunday she worked the sideline of the Packers-Cowboys game at Lambeau Field.
“Should I have been standing for a full game five days after surgery? Let’s just say the doctor didn’t recommend that,” Andrews says. “But just as I felt during my trial, sports were my escape. I needed to be with my crew.”
Steve Andrews had joined his daughter in Green Bay, and he remembers her lying down a lot that weekend. She normally spends free time watching tape with Aikman or squeezing in workouts, but instead she retreated to her hotel room. “It must have been a week later, but I noticed she wasn’t really herself,” says Rich Russo, who directs Fox’s telecast.
“Are you O.K.?” Russo asked. “Yeah, I’m fine,” was the response. Soon after, she revealed to her colleagues that she was not.
“After the trial everyone kept telling me, ‘You’re so strong, for going through all of this, for holding down a job in football, for being the only woman on the crew,’ ” Andrews says. “Finally I got to the point where I believed it too. ‘Hey, I have cancer, but dammit, I am strong, and I can do this.’ ”

* * *
An NFL broadcast enters living rooms and sports bars with such polished curation, it’s easy for viewers to take its orchestration for granted. Aikman and Buck, celebrating their 15th season as partners, can communicate with each other entirely nonverbally while narrating a 3 1⁄2-hour broadcast. Andrews joined the team full-time in 2014. “Throughout my career, all I’ve ever wanted is to just fit in,” Andrews says. “That I had this extra baggage with the scandal, I didn’t want to be any different. I felt that way about being sick too. I don’t want players or coaches to look at me differently.”
“I’ve always seen Erin as a role model for my daughters,” says Shelley Meyer, who became close with Andrews when the reporter covered Urban Meyer’s Florida Gators. “Because when you watch her on TV, you aren’t distracted by the fact she’s female. She’s just a reporter.”
Adds Buck, “There are parts of our broadcast that would be s--- if she weren’t so good at feeding us information.”
 

In Florida, where Andrews grew up and learned to love sports by watching with her father, a television journalist himself, Steve Andrews closed the door to his office. “I gazed out the window and quietly wept,” he says. “Such an incredible weight had been lifted off her shoulders. I try not to think about what happened to her too much. But when I do, and I consider the enormity of what Erin has endured, I’ll often just sit down and cry.”

In Week 1, as she was covering Cowboys-Giants in Dallas, she introduced herself to Jason Pierre-Paul. The Giants’ defensive end is suing ESPN for publishing a picture of his medical records last summer. “I know we don’t know each other well, and I don’t know where you are with your lawsuit,” Andrews said. “But for someone who just fought a huge battle with privacy, all I have to say is, Whatever you need, I’m right there.”
On Oct. 30, Andrews was in Atlanta to cover Falcons-Packers, in what would be a foreshadowing of the NFC championship game. She approached Green Bay receiver Randall Cobb during pregame warmups. The sixth-year veteran would not play that day because of a hamstring injury. “How are you?” Andrews asked. “Sorry you’re not doing so well.”
“Yeah, yeah, I’ll get there,” Cobb answered. “But how are you?” There was a pause. “You know, I never told you this,” he continued, “but I never really understood what you went through. I knew bits and pieces, but after following the trial, I just wanted to tell you I have a new respect for you.”
Andrews’s eyes welled up as she heard those words, standing on the 30-yard line of the Georgia Dome, exactly where she wanted to be.


Former Los Angeles Kings defenseman Slava Voynov's petition to have his 2015 domestic violence charges dismissed was granted by the Los Angeles County Superior Court on Monday.
That brings Voynov, 28, one step closer to his goal of returning to the NHL.
In October 2014, Voynov was arrested after he and his wife got into an argument at the couple's home in Redondo Beach, California. Voynov spent nearly two months in jail after pleading no contest to corporal injury against a spouse. After serving time, Voynov agreed to voluntarily leave the country and return to his native Russia. He played in the KHL for the next three seasons and competed in the 2018 Olympics.
Prosecutors opposed Voynov's request to dismiss his conviction and argued in court papers that it is "impossible to determine" whether he met all of the conditions of probation after his plea because he returned to Russia.
A doctor told the court that Voynov had completed 28 domestic violence counseling sessions but noted the couple had a "lack of emotional awareness and difficulty to communicate effectively," court documents said. The counseling, prosecutors argue, was not sufficient to satisfy the legal requirement after his plea.
The Kings terminated Voynov's six-year, $25 million contract and placed him on their voluntary retirement list. He is technically under contract through the 2018-19 season and the Kings retain his rights. According to NHL deputy commissioner Bill Daly, the Kings have the ability to trade those rights if they choose.
The NHL confirmed that Voynov had a meeting with commissioner Gary Bettman this spring to begin outlining the process of re-entering the league. The NHL was going to wait for this court decision as well as clarity on Voynov's immigration status before moving forward.
The NHL is the only one of the four major professional sports leagues in North America that doesn't have a specific domestic violence policy.
"At the time everything happened, he was dealing immediately with legal issues and immigration issues," Daly said in Las Vegas before the NHL Awards. "He really was not in a position where he could allow us to investigate in any meaningful way. And then he ended up going back to the KHL. Really, in a lot respects, we're starting from ground zero with him in terms for understanding exactly what happened, what transpired since, what all the circumstances are. Obviously, all of those would go into any ultimate decision by [NHL commissioner Gary Bettman] as to his eligibility to play."
According to the Los Angeles Times, which obtained the police report of the 2014 incident, Voynov choked his wife with both hands, repeatedly pushed her to the ground and kicked her five to six times on the ground. She was shoved into the corner of a television mounted on a wall and, according to the L.A. Times report, told police in a recorded interview: "My blood, all over bedroom and bathroom ... and it's not the first time."
Daly told The Associated Press by email that Voynov's status has not changed but that he can now proceed with a petition for reinstatement.
The Kings said in a statement to The AP: "Any decision to reinstate Slava Voynov into the league is in the hands of the NHL. It is premature to comment prior to the NHL's ruling."
Information from the Associated Press was used in this report. 

The opening day of 2018 NHL free agency included a seismic shift in the league's balance of power, with John Tavares signing a seven-year, $77 million deal with the ascendant Toronto Maple Leafs.
But the Leafs weren't the only winners, and the teams that lost out on Tavares aren't the only losers. Here's our rundown of both sides of the ledger after the opening hours of the free-agent frenzy:
Countless teams wanted to audition for "The Bachelor." Just six made the final cut. Only the Maple Leafs received a rose.
Toronto landed the prize of free agency in John Tavares. The future is bright in Toronto with two superstar centers (one is 27 years old, the other is 20) and a 32-year-old general manager in Kyle Dubas who apparently made such an eloquent pitch, Tavares couldn't refuse. What's more, the Maple Leafs are boasting love and peace in the locker room. "Ego? What ego?" they ask.
Auston Matthews doesn't mind sharing the spotlight -- he even helped recruit Tavares. Line combinations are irrelevant. Everything is swell. The Leafs are no longer lovable underdogs; the Westgate Las Vegas SuperBook promoted Toronto to 8-to-1 odds to win the Stanley Cup after this deal. It's going to be difficult to keep Jake Gardiner from unrestricted free agency next summer, and the defensive group in general is pretty shaky. But for now, it's all gravy.
Lou Lamoriello is a stabilizer. He arrived in Toronto when they needed a veteran executive in the general manager's role, and left three years later with the Leafs as a rising Stanley Cup contender. There's no better validation of that status than the Maple Leafs being good enough to attract the premiere unrestricted free agent available.
John Tavares immediately makes the Toronto Maple Leafs a serious Stanley Cup contender.
The Bruins will be fine. The Lightning will be fine. The Islanders? Not so much. Examining the aftermath for all the jilted suitors.
We're keeping track of every notable signing and trade throughout the offseason right here, with a signing tracker and expert grades.
Unfortunately, that free agent also happened to be the franchise center for Lamoriello's new team, the New York Islanders. John Tavares' leaving rips the heart of the current incarnation of the Islanders. The draw of his childhood team was far more powerful than that of Lamoriello, coach Barry Trotz, the Islanders' frequent also-ran status and arena uncertainty. A petty statement about Tavares having "achieved great individual success on the ice" was the capper for one of the most brutal days in the history of the Islanders.
Tavares joins Brendan Shanahan, Scott Gomez, Scott Niedermayer and Zach Parise as elite talents who left Lamoriello's teams as free agents.
GM John Chayka continues his tradition of strong offseasons.
First, the Coyotes flipped Max Domi to Montreal for Alex Galchenyuk, giving the young (hopefully) center the change in scenery he needs. They inked speedy scorer Michael Grabner at $3.35 million annually for three seasons. They re-upped Kevin Connauton for two years at $1.375 million against the cap. They also extended Niklas Hjalmarsson through 2021 at $5 million per season.
Arizona still has over $16 million cap space and has already checked off a number of boxes.
While the Islanders were embarrassed by the Tavares decision, no team was more humiliated by it than the Montreal Canadiens.
First, they didn't even get an invite to pitch the top free agent of the summer. Then, they watched him sign within their division and with their blood rivals, the Toronto Maple Leafs. Factor in trading Galchenyuk for Domi, who is not a center, and then acquiring Joel Armia from the Jets, who has rarely played center, and the Canadiens remain a donut.
But hey, at least they brought back Tomas Plekanec so he can retire as a Canadien.
Plenty of teams felt jilted by the Tavares decision -- compounded by the elongated and secretive process.
The Islanders, of course, were most scorned by Tavares; they drafted the center No. 1 overall in 2009, courted him over the past 12 months and tried to appeal to him with a new GM and coach (who have both won Stanley Cups) ... then watched their captain walk away without recouping anything. Lamoriello released a curt, 56-word statement congratulating Tavares on his "individual success." Zing.
San Jose Sharks GM Doug Wilson, who cleared cap space and boasted a championship-ready roster, thanked his own "world-class players" who "have continually chosen to bypass a chance at unrestricted free agency in recent years because they want to play in San Jose." (Of course, this is the same team that lost Patrick Marleau to free agency last summer).
The Jets were saddled with 16 restricted free agents to take care of, including 12 for whom they made qualifying offers. They also need to figure out an extension for Patrik Laine. Even still, GM Kevin Cheveldayoff found a way to clear cap space -- via a stealth unloading of Steve Mason's bloated contract to the Canadiens -- with the goal of retaining their trade-deadline rental, Paul Stastny. After all, Stastny was terrific with the Jets, especially through the playoffs, as a complement to Laine on the second line.
The Jets offered Stastny a three-year deal (the same term he accepted with the Vegas Golden Knights) but were not able to match Vegas' $6.5 million per year. The Jets had their perfect No. 2 center within grasp -- and could do nothing but let him walk away.
David Perron inked with the St. Louis Blues, James van Riemsdyk signed with the Philadelphia Flyers, Thomas Vanek with the Detroit Red Wings. Remind us, what year is this again?
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
If 2018 free agency reminded us of anything, it's that it is possible to go home again. And to try to do the thing that eluded you the first go-around.
Perhaps this is best illustrated by Perron, the first example of a Golden Misfit returning to the team that once exposed him. Perron has played for five teams in his career and yet somehow the Blues are the only team to sign him to a contract (he's now on his fifth with the club).
According to the New York Post, NHL commissioner Gary Bettman handed an edict to the NHL board of governors: To stop handing out signing bonuses for seasons around the next potential lockout in 2020-21.
Tampa Bay Lightning owner Jeff Vinik was a good soldier, foregoing any signing bonus for Ryan McDonagh during those seasons. The Toronto Maple Leafs? Not so much: Tavares will make $70.89 million of his $77 million in signing bonuses and is scheduled to make $11.09 million in bonuses during the 2020-21 season.
When the highest-profile signing by a league standard-bearer defies those wishes, Bettman takes an L.
We didn't hear the Capitals mentioned much -- if at all -- on July 1, but don't discount them as the big winners of 2018 free agency.
Remember, the big fish in this year's sea (besides Tavares) was supposed to be John Carlson. The Capitals locked in their No. 1 defenseman to an eight-year deal, worth $8 million per season. The 28-year-old likely would have commanded more money on the open market.
Washington also locked in two of its big playoff performers, Michal Kempny and Devante Smith-Pelly, while fending off other suitors. They also let somebody else overpay for Jay Beagle. Stanley Cup champions in the salary-cap era rarely get to return the virtually same roster the next season. Washington will do so, minus its backup goaltender and a fourth-liner (whose role will be filled by a homegrown youngster). Not bad.
The Vancouver Canucks are in an awkward, post-Sedins era. There's money on the roster in veteran players, and there is a collection of great young players, such as Bo Horvat and Brock Boeser.
And now, there is a pair of veteran fourth-liners in Antoine Roussel and Beagle who are signed for four years each for a combined $6 million against the cap each year. GM Jim Benning said that four years was "the market for those players," which might come as a surprise to many, as apparently there was a market for those players at all.
We knew Tyler Bozak and Leo Komarov were unlikely to stick around, even before Tavares' decision was announced. We didn't know just how much other teams coveted the Maple Leafs' discards.
Bozak, who is 32 years old, commanded $5 million per year from the Blues. The 31-year-old Komarov, a bottom-six forward whose best asset is his versatility, somehow picked up $3 million per year over four years with the Islanders. Of course, that was part of a desperate contingency plan for New York after it learned Tavares would take his services elsewhere.
Hey, you can say this about Tavares: A rising tide lifts all boats. Even in the harbor it abandoned.
Ryan O'Reilly remained a member of the Buffalo Sabres, as teams such as the Blues balked at the asking price. Max Pacioretty of the Canadiens remained in limbo. Erik Karlsson received a contract offer from the Ottawa Senators, but GM Pierre Dorion declined to say for how much or what Karlsson's reaction was.
So, as July 1 came and went, these veterans were still twisting in the wind, refreshing Cap Friendly to see how much room San Jose and Tampa Bay had left.
Backup goalies got some decent money and plenty of term during the free-agent frenzy.
Carter Hutton got three years at $2.75 million per season from the Sabres, Jonathan Bernier got three years at $3 million per season from the Red Wings, and Jaroslav Halak got two years at $2.75 million from the Boston Bruins. Cam Ward, meanwhile, got $3 million out of the Chicago Blackhawks for one season, a team that's already paying Corey Crawford $6 million against the cap next season. It was a good day to be a goalie.
This year's free-agency period was fun. Next year was supposed to include the most razzle dazzle we've seen in a while -- except suddenly, things aren't shaping up that way.
Drew Doughty and Oliver Ekman-Larsson, two prized 2019 unrestricted free-agent defensemen, opted for stability and signed long-term extensions with their current clubs. Tyler Seguin will likely do the same with the Dallas Stars, and so will Marc-Andre Fleury, who revived his career with the Golden Knights, and possibly Wayne Simmonds with the Flyers, Joe Pavelski with the Sharks, Blake Wheeler with the Winnipeg Jets and ... OK, we could keep going, but we'll stop there.
There will still be some big names available. Erik Karlsson theoretically headlines the list, followed by Sergei Bobrovsky (and a half a dozen serviceable goalies), Artemi Panarin, Matt Duchene, Jordan Eberle and Jeff Skinner.
But we know the way these things usually go. Let's see how many of these guys are still available next July 1.

The NHL's free-agent frenzy will begin Sunday. While some significant names might not make it to the open market, there will be plenty of other options from which to choose.
Of course, what makes it "the frenzy" is that it's not just about signing players; it's about the trades being made to create cap space, or to fill other needs.
Here's a look at all 31 teams, where they stand with the salary cap (through Tuesday night, via Cap Friendly), the free agents (unrestricted and restricted) who might leave and the players the teams might pursue.

Cap space: $24,352,502
Players hitting UFA: RW Lee Stempniak, C Derek Ryan, G Cam Ward, LW Joakim Nordstrom, LW Phil Di Giuseppe
Players hitting RFA: D Trevor van Riemsdyk, C Greg McKegg, C Lucas Wallmark, LW Valentin Zykov
Targets in free agency, trades: G Carter Hutton, G Jonathan Bernier, G Anton Khudobin, C Riley Nash, LW Leo Komarov, LW Chris Kunitz
The offseason is a win if they bring in a big haul for winger Jeff Skinner. The same could be said for defenseman Justin Faulk, Victor Rask or any of the other Hurricanes who have circulated in trade rumors. As new owner Tom Dundon promises a total culture change, it feels as if almost every player's status is tenuous. That's fine, as long as the Canes recoup significant assets in return.
Be careful of not being able to field a competitive roster next season. Dundon can talk a big game about wanting change, but if the team regresses, fans will sour fast. That's why the Hurricanes should look into some veteran forward options. They'll also need a new backup goaltender, someone who can presumably push Scott Darling as the No. 1 -- and take over if Darling continues to struggle.

Cap space: $17,184,168
Players hitting UFA: LW Thomas Vanek, LW Matt Calvert, C Mark Letestu, D Taylor Chorney, D Ian Cole, D Jack Johnson
Players hitting RFA: RW Oliver Bjorkstrand, Boone Jenner, D Ryan Murray
Targets in free agency, trades: RW Rick Nash, C Tyler Bozak, LW David Perron, LW James Neal, LW Leo Komarov, D Ian Cole
The offseason is a win if they can convince Artemi Panarin to sign an extension before the summer is over. When Panarin told GM Jarmo Kekalainen that he wasn't ready to commit to Columbus long term -- at least right now, anyway -- it hamstrung the Blue Jackets' future planning. Panarin is a player to build around. Things could change between now and the beginning of the season, and a change of heart would be best-case scenario for Columbus. Panarin becomes a UFA next summer and if nothing is done by the trade deadline, expect him to be moved.
Be careful of entering the 2018-19 season without acquiring any depth scoring. Panarin led all Blue Jackets last season with 82 points; no other Columbus forward cracked 50. Kekalainen needs to find other ways his team can produce offense, and that might have to come on the free-agent market.

Cap space: $24,398,333
Players hitting UFA: RW Jimmy Hayes, RW Michael Grabner, LW Patrick Maroon, C Brian Gibbons, LW Drew Stafford, D John Moore, G Eddie Lack
Players hitting RFA: LW Miles Wood, RW Stefan Noesen, LW Blake Coleman, D Steven Santini
Targets in free agency, trades: RW Michael Grabner, LW Patrick Maroon, LW David Perron, D Calvin de Haan, D Brooks Orpik, D John Moore, D Thomas Hickey
The offseason is a win if the Devils can keep a guy like Maroon around, and also sign a defenseman or two. A Maroon re-signing seems tangible at this point, and that's good because New Jersey needs scorers to take some pressure off Taylor Hall. The defense needs the most help though, especially with captain Andy Greene showing signs of regressing and Moore potentially being paid to head elsewhere.
Be careful of not addressing defense. With John Carlson off the board, there really aren't many sure things on the market. For example, the defenseman most likely to be paid big is de Haan, who played only 33 games last season. But the Devils can't bank on the group they have. They absolutely need another capable body to add.

We examine the pitch and cap situations for eight suitors and offer odds on the superstar picking each team.
The free-agency frenzy gets started Sunday. Which players will be a smart buy? Who is a major risk?
Chris Peters grades and analyzes the draft picks for all 31 NHL teams.
Cap space: $32,759,167
Players hitting UFA: C Chris Wagner, LW Nikolay Kulemin, C Alan Quine, C John Tavares, LW Shane Prince, D Calvin de Haan, D Thomas Hickey, D Brandon Davidson, D Dennis Seidenberg, G Jaroslav Halak
Players hitting RFA: LW Ross Johnston, F Brock Nelson, D Ryan Pulock
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, C Jay Beagle, D Brooks Orpik, D Calvin de Haan, D John Moore, G Carter Hutton, G Robin Lehner, G Cam Ward, G Jonathan Bernier
The offseason is a win if they keep Tavares, plain and simple. If Tavares chooses another team, this summer will always be known as a bust for the Islanders, especially considering they put a GM and coach in place who were supposed to convince Tavares to stay.
Be careful of overcommitting to one of the goalies on the market; many of them are damaged goods. Of course, beggars can't really be choosers and the Islanders are in desperate need of any help at the position. Cap space shouldn't be as much of an issue as term; none of the goalies on the market should inspire full confidence based off their résumés.

Cap space: $29,450,556
Players hitting UFA: C Paul Carey, F Cody McLeod, D Ryan Sproul, G Ondrej Pavelec
Players hitting RFA: C Ryan Spooner, C Kevin Hayes, LW Jimmy Vesey, LW Vladislav Namestnikov, D Rob O'Gara, D John Gilmour, D Brady Skjei
Targets in free agency, trades: RW Michael Grabner, LW Antoine Roussel, RW Tommy Wingels
The offseason is a win if the Rangers can add some veterans -- especially veterans who play gritty -- to set the example for a very young roster in 2018-19. As New York fully commits to the rebuild (at least for now) the goal is not necessarily to win next season, but set a foundation for the next Stanley Cup window. But given the market, the Rangers need to field at least a respectable team (they can't fully tank), which is why short deals for vets make sense.
Be careful of being tempted by old habits. That means jumping into the market for a player like James van Riemsdyk or Erik Karlsson (via trade). By all indications, the Rangers are remaining disciplined in staying to their new approach; they were out on Ilya Kovalchuk pretty early. But it's the New York Rangers after all, and you never know.

Cap space: $21,740,833
Players hitting UFA: C Valtteri Filppula, RW Matt Read, D Brandon Manning, D Johnny Oduya, G Petr Mrazek
Players hitting RFA: LW Taylor Leier, D Robert Hagg, G Alex Lyon
Targets in free agency, trades: C Tyler Bozak, C Riley Nash, C Paul Stastny, C Tomas Plekanec, D Mike Green, D Ian Cole, D Calvin de Haan, RW Michael Grabner, C/W Austin Czarnik
The offseason is a win if GM Ron Hextall only tinkers with his roster, making one or two smart veteran free-agent additions. The Flyers could use a third-liner, for example, as well as a dependable defenseman. Other than that, there's nothing on the free-agent market that should entice a team like the Flyers.
Be careful of signing any free agents to contracts with term. Philadelphia has a few financial commitments on the mind, mainly a long-term extension for Ivan Provorov (which should be coming soon), an extension for Travis Konecny who also becomes an RFA next summer, and also a new deal for Wayne Simmonds, who is an unrestricted free agent after the 2018-19 season.

Cap space: $8,532,500
Players hitting UFA: C Carter Rowney, C Josh Jooris, RW Tom Kuhnhackl
Players hitting RFA: D Jamie Oleksiak, G Tristan Jarry
Targets in free agency, trades: D Jack Johnson, D John Moore, D Cody Franson, D Thomas Hickey
The offseason is a win if they get a decent defenseman -- and especially if they can get said D-man on the cheap, without having to unload other contracts. Pittsburgh has a reputation as a place where defensemen's careers can be revived, so someone like Franson (buried last year with Chicago's AHL team) makes sense. The real prize would be Johnson -- Sidney Crosby's good friend -- but that would take some finagling.
Be careful of clearing too much cap space to sign Johnson. The Penguins already found a trade partner for Conor Sheary ($3 million cap hit), and could also do so for Carl Hagelin ($4 million cap hit) -- and maybe even Phil Kessel, though we think that ship has passed -- but the detriment to the forward group might not be worth it for a little defensive help.

Cap space: $13,215,705
Players hitting UFA: RW Alex Chiasson, C Jay Beagle, D Jakub Jerabek
Players hitting RFA: RW Tom Wilson, C Travis Boyd, D Madison Bowey
Targets in free agency, trades: C Jay Beagle, RW Anthony Duclair, RW Tobias Rieder, C Mark Letestu, D Brooks Orpik
The offseason is a win if ... OK let's be honest, the Capitals already won the offseason. They figured out a way to keep John Carlson around -- long term -- in a tight cap squeeze. They also re-upped with playoff hero Devante Smith-Pelly and Carlson partner Michal Kempny.
Be careful of partying too much? Really, there's not much more to worry about for the Capitals, as most of their work is done this offseason. They might go for some cheap supplements (such as veterans who didn't receive qualifying offers) but with barely no money to play around with, the Capitals will look very similar to start the 2018-19 season. Albeit perhaps a bit bleary-eyed.

Cap space: $11,984,333
Players hitting UFA: LW Rick Nash, C Riley Nash, LW/RW Tommy Wingels, C Tim Schaller, D Nick Holden, G Anton Khudobin
Players hitting RFA: C Sean Kuraly
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, LW Wayne Simmonds, LW James van Riemsdyk, LW Jeff Skinner, LW Pat Maroon, LW/RW James Neal, D Oscar Klefbom, D Jonas Brodin, D Jacob Trouba.
The offseason is a win if the Bruins sufficiently address their hole on the wing on the second line. Rick Nash is a solid player and a good citizen, but any team with designs on the Stanley Cup can't afford a goal scorer who devolves into nothingness the minute the playoffs start. They took a swing at Ilya Kovalchuk and missed. Luckily, there are more than a few good options on the left side via free agency and trade.
Be careful of doing anything that might take away ice time from, or hurt the development of, the team's younger players. But the Bruins seem fairly cautious about this.

Cap space: $23,690,476
Players hitting UFA: RW Jordan Nolan, LW Scott Wilson, LW Benoit Pouliot, D Justin Falk, D Josh Gorges, D Victor Antipin, G Robin Lehner, G Chad Johnson
Players hitting RFA: RW San Reinhart
Targets in free agency, trades: LW James van Riemsdyk, LW Jeff Skinner, G Carter Hutton, G Jimmy Howard, G Craig Anderson, G Anton Khudobin, G Kari Lehtonen.
The offseason is a win if the Sabres get a solid haul for center Ryan O'Reilly, who needs a change in scenery. They're not going to be hurting for suitors, despite his $7.5 million cap hit through 2023.
Be careful of letting Rasmus Dahlin be the only important addition to the defense corps. The Sabres gave up 3.39 goals per game last season, third worst in the NHL. We have the utmost confidence in goalie Linus Ullmark taking the crease from Lehner, but it'd be nice to give him some help on the blue line.

Cap space: $20,502,956
Players hitting UFA: LW David Booth, D Mike Green, D Xavier Ouellet
Players hitting RFA: LW Dylan Larkin, C Andreas Athanasiou, RW Anthony Mantha
Targets in free agency, trades: C Valtteri Filppula, LW Thomas Vanek, LW Anthony Duclair, RW Michael Grabner, D Calvin de Haan, G Carter Hutton, G Anton Khudobin.
The offseason is a win if the Red Wings get anything close to the return they received for Tomas Tatar from the Golden Knights if they trade forward Gustav Nyquist, who is entering the last year of his contract. The problem is that they'd be selling low, as Nyquist had 40 points in 82 games.
Be careful of giving defenseman Green that third contract year he's asking for.

Cap space: $8,344,168
Players hitting UFA: C Connor Brickley
Players hitting RFA: C Jared McCann, LW Frank Vatrano, D Alex Petrovic, D MacKenzie Weegar
Targets in free agency, trades: D Ian Cole, D Calvin de Haan, D Alexei Emelin, D Tobias Enstrom, D Michal Kempný, D Paul Martin, D John Moore.
The offseason is a win if none of the players' wives, girlfriends or partners are suddenly getting cyberbullied on Instagram. If Mike Hoffman can put the scandal that hastened his departure from Ottawa behind him and blossom with Vincent Trocheck and Jonathan Huberdeau, it's a win for Florida. Other than that, GM Dale Tallon said it could be a quiet free-agent season.
Be careful of making the mistake of keeping Petrovic around for the second straight summer. Last time, it helped cost them Jonathan Marchessault and Reilly Smith, who were two-thirds of Vegas' top line. Petrovic is an RFA who slid down the depth chart last season, and there should be teams happy to hear he's in play.

Cap space: $18,612,025
Players hitting UFA: RW Ales Hemsky, C Logan Shaw, LW Daniel Carr, G Zachary Fucale
Players hitting RFA: C Jacob de la Rose, C Phillip Danault, F Michael McCarron, F Kerby Rychel
Targets in free agency, trades: C Paul Stastny, C Ryan O'Reilly, C Tyler Bozak, LW James van Riemsdyk, LW Anthony Duclair.
The offseason is a win if GM Marc Bergevin does what he was unable to do at the NHL draft, which is get a significant return for winger Max Pacioretty while acquiring O'Reilly from the Sabres. In both cases, the Canadiens can use their considerable financial resources to take on problematic contracts from trade partners to help facilitate the moves.
Be careful of giving Stastny the kind of free-agent contract that had people down on the veteran during most of his time in St. Louis.

Cap space: $19,311,667
Players hitting UFA: LW Alex Burrows, D Fredrik Claesson
Players hitting RFA: RW Mark Stone, D Cody Ceci
Targets in free agency, trades: D Calvin de Haan, G Jaroslav Halak, G Robin Lehner, G Kari Lehtonen, G Petr Mrazak, G Cam Ward
The offseason is a win if Eugene Melynk sells the team. But since that's not going to happen, the offseason is a win if the Senators maximize the return if and when they trade star defenseman Erik Karlsson, after he likely rejects their "thrifty" contract offer to sign him. GM Pierre Dorion has the luxury of having a group of teams looking to rent Karlsson and another group looking to sign him long term. We know the Senators want to hitch Bobby Ryan's contract to Karlsson; in a perfect world, that frugality would be ignored in favor of exploiting that return. But this is Melnyk we're talking about here.
Be careful of anyone who would willingly sign a long-term contract with this franchise at the moment, because he might be unstable.

Cap space: $10,561,220
Players hitting UFA: LW Chris Kunitz, D Andrej Sustr
Players hitting RFA: LW Adam Erne, C Cedric Paquette, D Slater Koekkoek
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, D Erik Karlsson, a veteran depth player with a Stanley Cup ring (as GM Steve Yzerman had added several times through the years)
The offseason is a win if they somehow convince Tavares to sign a reasonable contract to play with Steven Stamkos, and are able to offload the necessary salary to make it work (looking at you, Tyler Johnson). Or, failing that, getting Karlsson on the roster for next season, and then figuring out the future after that.
Be careful of believing in the inevitability of this team to win the Stanley Cup next season, when the window is wide open. There's still room for improvement, even if it's not in the form of Tavares or Karlsson.

Cap space: $24,679,167
Players hitting UFA: LW James van Riemsdyk, C Tyler Bozak, C Tomas Plekanec, LW Leo Komarov, C Dominic Moore, D Roman Polak
Players hitting RFA: C William Nylander
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, C Paul Stastny, C Joe Thornton, C Riley Nash, C Derek Ryan, D Chris Tanev, D Matt Dumba, D Mike Green, D Ian Cole, D John Moore
The offseason is a win if they somehow convince Tavares to drink the blue Kool-Aid, sign a one-year max contract and then sign a cap-friendly, eight-year extension next summer. And if they bring in -- probably via a trade -- some upgrades to their blue line.
Be careful of any of the other veteran alternatives at center, unless it's Thornton at a discount.

Cap space: $9,225,705
Players hitting UFA: D Cody Franson, D Michal Rozsival, G Jeff Glass, LW Lance Bouma, LW Anthony Duclair, F Tomas Jurco
Players hitting RFA: D Adam Clendening
Targets in free agency, trades: G Jonathan Bernier, G Carter Hutton, G Scott Darling, G Cam Ward, G Jaroslav Halak, G Robin Lehner, G Kari Lehtonen, LW James van Riemsdyk, LW Max Pacioretty, D Calvin de Haan, D Ian Cole, D Justin Faulk
The offseason is a win if the Blackhawks can add a top-four defenseman. There's a surplus of D-men in Chicago, so that might mean moving the contract of someone like Connor Murphy ($3.85 cap hit, never became a favorite of coach Joel Quenneville). An ideal trade target would be Faulk in Carolina. Chicago is also looking for someone to take Marian Hossa's cap hit off their books; once again, the Hurricanes could be a good partner.
Be careful of overpaying for a scorer. If GM Stan Bowman can work van Riemsdyk under the cap (he'll probably cost around $6 million), do it. Be more wary of the price for Pacioretty, who would cost significant assets in a trade. The Blackhawks do have plenty of firepower in Patrick Kane, Jonathan Toews (who should rebound), Alex DeBrincat, Nick Schmaltz and Dylan Sikura. Defense and goaltending (pending the return of Corey Crawford) are bigger concerns.

Cap space: $18,523,572
Players hitting UFA: LW Blake Comeau, G Jonathan Bernier
Players hitting RFA: LW Matt Nieto, RW Nail Yakupov, D Patrik Nemeth, D Duncan Siemens, G Spencer Martin
Targets in free agency, trades: C Tyler Bozak, C Paul Stastny, LW Matt Calvert, RW Chris Stewart, D Calvin de Haan, D Ian Cole, D Jack Johnson
The offseason is a win if they can win the Stastny sweepstakes. GM Joe Sakic still expects the Avalanche to get even younger in 2018-19, but a player of Stastny's stature and experience would be a terrific role model for the young roster. Plus, this team struggled with scoring outside of its top line. Stastny and Nathan MacKinnon as a 1-2 center punch would allow this team to line up with many top clubs in the Central.
Be careful of overpaying for Bozak, a likely consolation prize if they miss out on Stastny. There's interest between the Avs and the former Maple Leaf. Make no mistake, Bozak does a lot of things well -- but ideally he's a bottom-six forward at this point. And he should be paid as such.

Cap space: $19,820,001
Players hitting UFA: LW Antoine Roussel, D Dan Hamhuis, D Greg Pateryn, G Kari Lehtonen, LW Cole Ully
Players hitting RFA: C Gemel Smith, F Devin Shore, C Mattias Janmark, D Dillon Heatherington, LW Remi Elie, C Jason Dickerson, G Philippe Desrosiers
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, RW Tobias Rieder, G Jonathan Bernier, G Jaroslav Halak, G Carter Hutton, G Kari Lehtonen
The offseason is a win if Dallas -- the biggest long shot in the Tavares sweepstakes -- somehow comes out on top. But really, if they miss out on the prized center, the Stars would win the offseason by just staying quiet. GM Jim Nill made a huge splash last season, and as his team prepares to adjust to yet another head coach, Jim Montgomery, resisting other team's discards might not be a bad thing.
Be careful of signing risky free agents, a year after that same move backfired. Be wary of committing too much money in free agency, period. Remember, Nill needs to sort out an extension for Tyler Seguin soon. A player of Tavares' caliber is an exception; if Tavares is willing to come, figure it out. But if not, Nill should consider remaining nimble for future flexibility. After all, it might be a season of transition for the Stars.

Cap space: $11,932,243
Players hitting UFA: C Matt Cullen, C Kyle Rau, C Daniel Winnik, RW Kurtis Gabriel
Players hitting RFA: D Nick Seeler, D Ryan Murphy, D Matt Dumba, RW Jason Zucker
Targets in free agency, trades: C Tyler Bozak, C Jay Beagle, C Kyle Brodziak, C Derek Ryan, LW Patrick Maroon
The offseason is a win if they can trade some roster players. New GM Paul Fenton inherited a decent lineup, but one that has been unable to get over the playoff hump. To establish his voice as GM, he'll need to unload some contracts he doesn't like (perhaps Charlie Coyle, Nino Niederreiter or Zucker, who is due to get paid). If he's looking to maintain, just small adds are needed -- like center depth.
Be careful of doing something drastic. Trading Eric Staal? Now that's a dramatic move. Deciding against keeping Zucker might not make as many waves, but it still might be rash for the new GM -- especially with the season Zucker had in 2017-18. Although Fenton wants to infuse his voice, the truth is the Wild's roster is loaded and could very well win next season with only small tweaks.

Cap space: $12,000,834
Players hitting UFA: LW Scott Hartnell, D Alexei Emelin, G Anders Lindback
Players hitting RFA: RW Ryan Hartman, RW Miikka Salomaki, G Juuse Saros
Targets in free agency, trades: D John Moore, C/RW Riley Nash, LW James van Riemsdyk
The offseason is a win if the Predators stand pat. Nashville still boasts one of the most talented and complete rosters in the league and should expect just about everybody back, minus Mike Fisher, Hartnell -- who will look for opportunities elsewhere -- and probably Emelin. GM David Poile should prioritize a Ryan Ellis extension this summer, then save the cap room for a trade deadline move, if needed.
Be careful of making a splash for the sake of making a splash. Listening to Poile's comments this offseason, it doesn't seem likely the Predators will be big players in free agency or the trade market. However, with P.K. Subban's name a constant on the trade rumor circuit, we're putting this in writing, just in case. And they're reportedly one of the clubs in the John Tavares chase as well.

Cap space: $16,617,345
Players hitting UFA: LW Scottie Upshall, C Kyle Brodziak, G Carter Hutton
Players hitting RFA: F Robby Fabbri, F Dmitrij Jaskin, C Oskar Sundqvist, D Jordan Schmaltz, D Joel Edmundson
Targets in free agency, trades: LW Artemi Panarin, LW Jeff Skinner, C Ryan O'Reilly, C Tyler Bozak, C Paul Stastny, C Kyle Brodziak, LW Thomas Vanek, G Jaroslav Halak, G Anton Khudobin, G Ondrej Palat, G Eddie Lack
The offseason is a win if they snag one of the bigger names on the market. The Blues are perennially mentioned as one of the teams in the hunt for superstars but never seem to finish on top. (For example, long viewing themselves as a destination for John Tavares, they were not one of the handful of teams to receive a meeting.) They know they need some firepower alongside Vladimir Tarasenko.
Be careful of reaching out of desperation. The Blues' roster sure could use a scoring winger or a depth center -- O'Reilly feels like a perfect fit here -- but if the price is too high, GM Doug Armstrong is surely to regret it later.

Cap space: $25,097,502
Players hitting UFA: LW Shawn Matthias, LW Matt Hendricks, C Paul Stastny, D Toby Enstrom, G Michael Hutchinson
Players hitting RFA: RW Brandon Tanev, RW Joel Armia, C Marko Dano, C Adam Lowry, D Jacob Trouba, D Tucker Poolman, D Joshua Morrissey, G Connor Hellebuyck
Targets in free agency, trades: C Paul Stastny
The offseason is a win if the Jets can figure out a way to retain all of their important RFAs and somehow squeeze in a contract for Stastny as well. It's going to be difficult considering just how many players need new contracts; GM Kevin Cheveldayoff would need to get a current roster player off the books to work in Stastny. More likely, the Jets will keep most of their RFAs and make a long-term extension for Patrik Laine the other summer priority.
Be careful of the Laine contract. Cheveldayoff will probably sort out his RFA crunch before he begins working on the star Finnish winger's new contract in earnest. Laine, meanwhile, might want to wait for the market to set -- especially keeping an eye on Auston Matthews in Toronto. If you pay Laine now, you probably know his worth. Wait until the season starts and you risk him starting out with a bang; then the price goes even higher.

Cap space: $13,741,667
Players hitting UFA: C Antoine Vermette, C Derek Grant, C Chris Kelly, LW Jason Chimera, RW J.T. Brown, D Kevin Bieksa
Players hitting RFA: RW Ondrej Kase, LW Nick Ritchie, D Brandon Montour
Targets in free agency, trades: C Tyler Bozak or some better solution at center, D Calvin de Haan, D Jack Johnson
The offseason is a win if GM Bob Murray is able to improve his team while also bringing down its average age, especially at the center position, where the question mark over Ryan Kesler's health looms large. It would also be a win if Murray can get some "cost certainty" on Jakob Silfverberg, Adam Henrique and especially John Gibson, who are all free agents next summer.
Be careful of trading away Montour for help in other places in the lineup, because he's quite good. That holds for any of the next wave of Ducks prospects, for that matter.

Cap space: $22,541,391
Players hitting UFA: RW Brad Richardson, C Freddie Hamilton, LW Zac Rinaldo, D Luke Schenn
Players hitting RFA: C Laurent Dauphin
Targets in free agency, trades: LW Anthony Duclair, RW Michael Grabner, LW/RW James Neal, LW David Perron, LW/RW Tobias Rieder, LW James van Riemsdyk
The offseason is a win if GM John Chayka can find some more scoring on the wing, which is his stated goal. Unrestricted free agency offers a few options, including two Golden Knights, Perron and Neal. Chayka has plenty of cap room to spend.
Be careful of giving up on Christian Dvorak. The 22-year-old forward, entering the last year of his entry-level deal, was rumored to be in a trade proposal with the Wild before Max Domi was instead traded to Montreal. Dvorak hasn't really had a breakout season yet, but he has a world of potential.

Cap space: $24,488,290
Players hitting UFA: C Nick Shore, LW Tanner Glass, LW/RW Chris Stewart, LW/RW Kris Versteeg, C Marek Hrivik, D Matt Bartkowski
Players hitting RFA: C Elias Lindholm, RW Garnet Hathaway, D Noah Hanifin, D Brett Kulak
Targets in free agency, trades: C Derek Ryan, LW Anthony Duclair, RW Michael Grabner, LW/RW James Neal
The offseason is a win if the Dougie Hamilton trade is actually a good hockey deak and not some old-school hockey nonsense in which a guy who didn't "fit in with the boys" or had the gall to complain about his ice time was shipped out in a trade where he is demonstrably the best player. Oh, and if the players they acquired from the Hurricanes actually like playing for their former coach Bill Peters, as there is speculation that they didn't.
Be careful of overspending for UFA scoring help on the wing. The trade route might be a better option.

Cap space: $10,903,834
Players hitting UFA: RW Iiro Pakarinen, LW Michael Cammalleri, D Eric Gryba
Players hitting RFA: C Ryan Strome, LW Anton Slepyshev
Targets in free agency, trades: C Derek Grant, C Jay Beagle, LW Anthony Duclair, RW Michael Grabner, LW Patrick Maroon, LW/RW Tobias Rieder, D Justin Faulk, D Torey Krug, D Colton Parayko
The offseason is a win if the Oilers get a legitimate power-play quarterback on defense. That could mean an all-around player like Faulk, who is very much available from the Hurricanes. Or perhaps a player like Krug ... hey, maybe Boston would be interested in a slightly used, money-retained Milan Lucic?
Be careful of GM Peter Chiarelli moving out talent for the sake of filling a particular need. Or, like, making any kind of trade, for that matter.

Cap space: $3,179,773
Players hitting UFA: LW/RW Tobias Rieder, C Torrey Mitchell, D Kevin Gravel, D Christian Folin
Players hitting RFA: None
Targets in free agency, trades: After Ilya Kovalchuk, are there any?
The offseason is a win if GM Rob Blake was right on Kovalchuk, the 35-year-old Russian star whose services the Kings won by offering a third contract year; and if Blake is able to end the drama and get defenseman Drew Doughty under contract this summer, with the acknowledgement that the compensation is going to be considerable.
Be careful of assuming the bottom six on this team doesn't need some tinkering, despite the cap considerations L.A. has.

Cap space: $18,842,916
Players hitting UFA: C Joe Thornton, C Eric Fehr, RW Jannik Hansen, RW Joel Ward, D Dylan DeMelo
Players hitting RFA: RW Tomas Hertl, C Chris Tierney
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, LW Max Pacioretty, LW Jeff Skinner, RW Michael Grabner
The offseason is a win if Tavares is a San Jose Shark for the next seven years. Barring that, if the Sharks add another significant goal scorer to their top six, get Thornton back and then GM Doug Wilson hands out smartly budgeted extensions to Joe Pavelski and Logan Couture, both of whom are free agents next summer.
Be careful of moving 29-year-old goalie Aaron Dell for some help at the forward position. Yes, Martin Jones is a dependable starter, but Dell is an affordable luxury to have an as insurance policy. And with a clear window to win next season, they should keep that insurance.

Cap space: $25,213,821
Players hitting UFA: LW/RW Jussi Jokinen, C Nic Dowd, LW/RW Darren Archibald
Players hitting RFA: LW Sven Baertschi, RW Jake Virtanen, D Troy Stecher
Targets in free agency, trades: C Jay Beagle, C Tyler Bozak, C Riley Nash, C Derek Ryan
The offseason is a win if the Canucks find the right veteran center to play behind Bo Horvat and Brandon Sutter. There are more than a few options that fit the description, as GM Jim Benning knows this is a "proper development" build back to contention for the team, post-Sedins.
Be careful of trading Chris Tanev, as tantalizing as that might be. He could easily be part of the solution for this team while remaining with the Canucks, rather than being one as a trade asset.

Cap space: $30,975,000
Players hitting UFA: C Mikhail Grabovski, LW/RW James Neal, LW David Perron, RW Ryan Reaves, D Luca Sbisa, D Clayton Stoner.
Players hitting RFA: C William Karlsson, LW/RW Tomas Nosek, LW William Carrier, D Colin Miller, D Shea Theodore
Targets in free agency, trades: C John Tavares, D Erik Karlsson
The offseason is a win if the Golden Knights reel in a big fish. As owner Bill Foley said, the timeline for winning has been moved up after Vegas made the Stanley Cup Final. They're in a position, financially, to make a run at Tavares, consider Erik Karlsson or any number of other moves.
Be careful of going more than five years and $5 million annually with William Karlsson, who should instead come in right around where linemates Jonathan Marchessault and Reilly Smith are (both at $5 million), if not a little less on the cap.

DALLAS -- The 2018 NHL draft was, in comparison to other recent editions, a muted affair.
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
There were only two major trades made, and few credible rumors to spark speculation. Arguably the biggest move was the NHL return of a player who hasn't been in North America since 2013. Well, that and the most prized free agent of the summer agreeing to listen to other teams' pitches.
The draft itself had a Swedish defenseman, Rasmus Dahlin, selected by the Buffalo Sabres at No. 1 overall, and more "hey, maybes" than sure things among its top prospects.
That said, some teams and individuals leave "Big D" with "Big W's," while others walked off the draft floor taking an "L." Here's a look at the winners and losers at the 2018 NHL draft.
ESPN's Chris Peters gave the New York Islanders an "A" for their remarkable draft class of 2018. That includes the good fortune of having the potentially dynamic scorer Oliver Wahlstrom dropping to No. 11 and then snagging defenseman Noah Dobson at No. 12.
It extends to defenseman Bode Wilde (No. 41) and center Ruslan Iskhakov (No. 43) on Day 2.
"I don't think we could be more pleased with how it turned out," GM Lou Lamoriello said.
Chris Peters grades and analyzes the draft picks for all 31 NHL teams.
The 35-year-old free agent is headed to Los Angeles. What does that mean for other free agents, trade targets and the Kovy runners-up?
A five-player deal electrified the proceedings on Day 2 of the 2018 draft. Who came out ahead?
The news came down during the draft that Islanders superstar center John Tavares will field pitches from at least five teams in the next week, before he's scheduled to become an unrestricted free agent on July 1.
That includes two teams with considerable cap space (San Jose, Vegas), his hometown team (Toronto) and the team for which one of his closest friends plays (Tampa Bay).
The odds are still good that Tavares remains with the Islanders, who can give him eight years on a contract and where he's professed a desire to stay to help return the franchise to glory. But that doesn't make this any easier for Islanders fans.
Taking ownership of the incessant, unending booing that occurs whenever he shows up in front of a large group of NHL fans brings out a playfully antagonistic side to the commissioner -- rather than the exasperatingly antagonistic comportment that we usually see.
The NHL draft began Friday night with a solemn tribute to the Humboldt Broncos and the victims of that horrific bus crash earlier this season. Alas, the segment was presented by Bettman, who was welcomed with Pavlovian booing from fans. No one else could have done this segment? Only the guy who always gets booed at first sight at an event like this?
The fans, for what it's worth, calmed down after Bettman asked them to. But seriously, did the NHL not see this coming?
A senior vice president of hockey operations for the league, Gregory has played a large role in the development of the NHL draft since 1979, having also served as director of the NHL Central Scouting Bureau for several years. In 2007, he was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame as a builder.
He also has been the voice of Day 2 of the draft for decades, and this was his last draft serving in that role. He was given a standing ovation at the start of Round 2, and every team in the NHL thanked him for his service during the final round while making its picks.
The Dallas Stars captain was playfully dunked on by Hall of Famer and former Dallas captain Mike Modano. The two appeared on stage during the Stars' first-round pick, and Modano noted that while he had experienced this moment before, Benn never did.
"They usually don't let fifth-rounders on stage," Benn lamented.
Later, Modano noted how much prep time Benn needed before the appearance. "We just needed to get the script done early so he could have two hours to look at it. It was only two lines. But the name of the draft pick [Ty Dellandrea] sent him for a loop," he said, laughing.
It's a great time for USA Hockey. Youth participation is up. The NHL is on the verge of adding another American-based team (Seattle), which means potential growth in that region as well. In all, 55 Americans were drafted in 2018, as the U.S. is pumping out a new generation of stars.
Oh, and did we mention the buzz is already building for next year's draft, which should be headlined by an American, Jack Hughes, as the No. 1 pick? For now we have Jack's brother Quinn, a swift-skating defenseman, as well as Brady Tkachuk, a dynamite personality and potentially dominant power forward, among the top 10 picks.
It's going to be tough to market these young American stars when so many are stashed away in Canada. Tkachuk was picked by the very unsexy Ottawa Senators at No. 4. (His equally dynamic brother, Matthew, plays for the Calgary Flames.) Quinn Hughes was picked by the Vancouver Canucks.
Couple that group with Brock Boeser (Vancouver), Johnny Gaudreau (Calgary), Auston Matthews (Toronto) as well as the 11 Americans on Winnipeg's roster, and that's a haul of talent that casual fans won't get to catch on NBC's game of the week very often.
One bright spot: The Rangers traded up to select Minnesota-born K'Andre Miller at No. 22. An engaging personality, he could shine on Broadway -- though it might take a few years for him to make the roster.
There were plenty of teams in on the Ilya Kovalchuk sweepstakes. The Los Angeles Kings were the ones to get the good news.
The Kings always seemed like the favorite, and especially because they were willing to kick in a third year on the deal. GM Rob Blake was desperate to add offense after his team mustered only three goals in a first-round sweep by division rival Vegas in the playoffs. By all accounts, Kovalchuk still has juice (and should be especially lethal on the power play).
This signals the Kings are going all-in on a championship with this core; Kovalchuk will be the 10th player on the roster over the age of 30.
Boston Bruins GM Don Sweeney sounded cautiously optimistic Friday after making his pitch for Kovalchuk. Of all the teams that lost out on the Russian superstar, Boston could have used him the most.
Highlighted by interviews with Mat Barzal of the Islanders and P.K. Subban of the Predators, Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan discuss the NHL Awards in Las Vegas, including the touching tributes to the tragedies in Humboldt, Parkland and Vegas. Plus, they dish on Barry Trotz's move to New York, and cover all of your favorite segments! Listen »
Now Sweeney has to scrape together an offseason Plan B. Besides re-signing restricted free agents, the Bruins could use another scoring winger. So who are they going to call? Rick Nash.
"He's strongly indicated that Boston is a place he would consider," Sweeney said Saturday. "As would we."
We'll do Bruins fans a favor and not list Nash's stats with Boston in the 2018 playoffs.
The Washington Capitals' general manager greatly helped his chances to re-sign pending free-agent defenseman John Carlson by dealing away defenseman Brooks Orpik to the Colorado Avalanche, who bought out the final year of his $5.5 million average annual value contract.
The package of Orpik and goalie Philipp Grubauer netted Washington the No. 47 overall pick, which it used on Kody Clark, the son of former NHL player Wendel Clark.
While the restricted free-agent backup goalie has to be happy with his new three-year deal worth $10 million, it was Grubauer's stated goal to be a starting goaltender in the NHL. It won't happen next season, as GM Joe Sakic made it clear that Grubauer will share time with Semyon Varlamov. But hey, what's a little competition?
The Hurricanes promised to be active in reshaping their roster, and they delivered. Carolina unloaded two players who were proving difficult to re-sign, and in exchange added an established top-four defenseman (Dougie Hamilton), a stopgap, bottom-six forward (Micheal Ferland) and an elite defensive prospect (Adam Fox) who, if he signs, could be the face of the blue line for years to come.
GM Don Waddell has hinted that more moves still could come, but for now, Canes fans should feel better about the state of the roster.
For the second time in four years, Hamilton was shipped on draft weekend. And once again, the character assassins were out to rationalize why. (In an interview with Fan 960, Sportsnet's John Shannon said: "The whole team would go for lunch at Moxies, and Dougie Hamilton would go to the museum.")
That can't feel great for a defenseman who actually has played some great hockey of late, especially finding his way with Mark Giordano as a partner. We feel for Hamilton. We really do. Waddell says he plans on keeping him on the Canes' roster.
Filip Zadina might be the surest scorer in this draft, and somehow -- miraculously -- he fell in the Red Wings' lap at No. 6 overall. This is a winger who can play as soon as this season, even in a top-six role.
The Red Wings then capitalized on another draft faller, when center Joseph Veleno was available at No. 30. Detroit's biggest need was defense, and the Wings addressed that with three defensemen during the next two rounds.
Detroit is embarking on a total makeover, and this draft couldn't have gone any better for GM Ken Holland, who has been on a roll since the trade deadline after bringing in a haul for Tomas Tatar. Apparently, reports of Holland's demise have been greatly exaggerated. The Red Wings being good again is fun for everyone.
Fun was an endangered species for all but the Red Wings this weekend, after momentum had been building in the weeks before the draft.
The Ottawa Senators seemed poised to make several splashes -- the biggest involving Erik Karlsson. The Canadiens' Max Pacioretty could have been on the move. So, too, could the entire Carolina Hurricanes roster. Yes, the Hurricanes gave us something to buzz about on Day 2 with an old-school, five-player shuffle with the Flames.
We were promised a series of bombastic fireworks; instead, we got a few sparklers -- especially on Day 1.
The No. 1 pick was determined months ago, and the trade highlight was a backup goaltender (Philipp Grubauer) moved in a salary dump -- to a team that only expects to platoon him. Reporters seemed so desperate for drama that they prematurely began buzzing about a Pacioretty-to-San Jose trade that sadly never materialized.

The 2018 NHL draft kicks off in Dallas on Friday, which means 217 teenagers will get one step closer to their dream of playing in the NHL.
We'll forgive you if you don't know too much about the prospects just yet. Here at ESPN we figured we'd give you an introduction to some of the top prospects -- before they are household names -- by asking them about their ideal NHL linemates, sponsorship deals, what players have the most swag, their thoughts on fighting and the toughest opponents they've faced.
We also found out they really, really like Lululemon.
Quinn Hughes, D, Michigan (No. 5 overall prospect on Chris Peters' rankings): Duncan Keith is someone I've always enjoyed watching. That would be pretty cool to play with him. He's a special player.
Filip Zadina, RW, Halifax (No. 3): I would love to play with John Tavares; he's an awesome center. For a second option, I would put Steven Stamkos. He's an unbelievable player. I would love to play on that line.
There's skill galore in the top 20 on this year's NHL draft board. Chris Peters explores the top names available.
Like his dad Keith and brother Matthew, prospect Brady Tkachuk plays with an edge. We asked a scout to size up the big winger, then let Tkachuk respond.
Our panel checks in on the prospects they most want to see in the NHL, veterans who could be traded, best picks of the past five years and more.
Brady Tkachuk, LW, Boston University (No. 4): First I'll give you an easy one. Obviously my brother [Calgary Flames winger Matthew Tkachuk]. It would be special for both of us to play together, and obviously it's a dream for both of us.
But to go a bit outside, playing with Connor McDavid or Sidney Crosby -- that would be awesome. Those are probably the two best players in the league. Actually, I'm going to switch it up. I'd love to play with Alex Ovechkin. He seems like he's a great player, but to see him after the Stanley Cup, to see how funny he is. I got to meet him before Game 4. He's a great guy, and it would be great to play with him.
Evan Bouchard, D, London (No. 9): I think Drew Doughty. I've looked up to him for a while now. I think the way he plays the game, he sees the ice very well. Being from London, it's been pretty cool to see him around, too.
Andrei Svechnikov, RW, Barrie (No. 2): I would say Ovechkin and [Evgeny] Kuznetsov, just because it's Russian guys. They're good guys.
Noah Dobson, D, Acadie-Bathurst (No. 10): Probably Sidney Crosby. He's been a role model of mine growing up, being from the Maritimes, I always looked up to him, and I cheered for the Penguins growing up, so I'd love the chance to play with him.
Adam Boqvist, D, Brynas-Jr. (No. 7): Of course, it would be Erik Karlsson one day, but that's hard.
Dobson: Lululemon. I'm a big Lululemon guy. I wear a lot of Lululemon clothes.
Tkachuk: I'd say Lululemon. I'm wearing Lulu right now. Or Teddy Baker. I really like both those brands.
Boqvist: [Looks around, sees room full of Adidas draft signage] Adidas.
Hughes: I know Mathew Barzal just signed with Adidas a couple days ago. Adidas is pretty cool. They've got Yeezys and stuff, and I like Yeezys.
Zadina: I have never thought about this. But I love to wear Nike. So probably Nike.
Dobson: Nico Hischier, last year when he was in Halifax. He had a lot of skill, and he was really good defensively. So he was the complete package.
Bouchard: I'd probably say [St. Louis Blues prospect Jordan] Kyrou, he's pretty good.
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
Boqvist: Of course, [No. 1 prospect Rasmus] Dahlin, but we're both defensemen so, I think Svechnikov is very tough. He's big, fast and can protect the puck pretty good. I think I handled [playing against him] pretty good, but you need the whole team to stop him. You need to open your eyes if he's on the ice.
Tkachuk: Obviously Rasmus is a beast. He's up there. But Quinn Hughes, too. Everybody knows he's a good player, but he's so tough to play against, defensively he's so stellar, he has a great stick. Obviously he's a very good skater. So he's one of the toughest for sure.
Hughes: Connor McDavid. [What is it like defending against him?] Impossible. A gap is probably big, but then you don't want to have too close of a gap because then he just brings you wide.
Svechnikov: I would say [Vegas Golden Knights prospect and OHL Defenseman of the year Nic] Hague from Mississauga. He is very good.
Zadina: Probably Noah Dobson. He is a very good D. I played against him in the QMJHL. We played against each other in a lot of games.
Dobson: I was with Tyler Seguin and Jamie Benn earlier today, and they're pretty well-dressed guys, they've got a lot of swag out there. They're always getting at each other on who is the better dresser.
Tkachuk: That's a good one. I'm going to have to say my brother. He's got a good swag to him, and he doesn't really care what people say about him. He's up there.
Bouchard: Some of the stuff P.K. [Subban] wears is pretty crazy. I don't think I could pull that off.
Zadina: I was just watching Tyler Seguin's Instagram, and just he's pretty cool, he's a sweet guy. I met him today. He knows how to wear the clothes and he's got the tattoos. He's pretty cool.
Tkachuk: Yeah, I think so. I know it's a pretty touchy subject for people to talk about, but I think fighting is important because if you get rid of fighting, that means more people would take advantage of your star players. Maybe running after Sidney Crosby, Connor McDavid, who can't fight. So if fighting is there, it's kind of like that hidden thing, if you take a run at one of the star players, you're going to have to answer the bell to someone.
Highlighted by interviews with Mat Barzal of the Islanders and P.K. Subban of the Predators, Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan discuss the NHL Awards in Las Vegas, including the touching tributes to the tragedies in Humboldt, Parkland and Vegas. Plus, they dish on Barry Trotz's move to New York, and cover all of your favorite segments! Listen »
I definitely think it's important. I know people are probably going to be upset that I say that, but I think it makes the game safer when it comes to preventing cheap shots.
Dobson: That's a good question. Now it's definitely not as popular as it was. But there is still a time and a place for it. If there is a cheap hit on a younger guy or a dirty hit on one of your top players, it needs to be in the game. But it's definitely gone downhill from what it's used to be.
Hughes: No, I don't think it's crucial. I think it's probably important, for sure. It's a part of the game; it always will be, I think. But for my specific game I don't think it will be all that important.
Zadina: Yes. ... Maybe.

Being an NHL Awards voter is a bit like playing God, if God were less interested in running the totality of the universe than in the zone-start ratios of defensive forwards. Also if God knew there were more than 100 other gods whose opinions carried just as much weight and who therefore could invalidate any and all declarations or decisions with majority rule. But the whole "defining guidelines through one's own dogma or philosophy rather than a literal reading" thing with the NHL Awards seems pretty God-like, to be honest -- as is possessing the ego to have written the preceding sentences.
Anyway, here are our ballots. It's an honor to have an opportunity to cast our votes on an annual basis as members of the Professional Hockey Writers Association and an honor on which we spend far too many hours researching and revising -- because it's not something to dash off in 10 minutes, especially with the data now available to us through analytics sites such as Corsica and Natural Stat Trick. Unless we're talking about the Jack Adams. That probably took about 30 seconds.
Awarded to the player judged most valuable to his team.
Winner: Taylor Hall
Greg's ballot
1. Taylor Hall, New Jersey Devils
2. Nathan MacKinnon, Colorado Avalanche
3. Anze Kopitar, Los Angeles Kings
4. Claude Giroux, Philadelphia Flyers
5. Blake Wheeler, Winnipeg Jets
The NHL is taking a new approach at its awards show, honoring victims of tragedies from this past year in and around the hockey community.
With the market open, we sort the players available into four groups: best bets, smart gambles, boom or busts, and bad investments.
Can the Islanders keep John Tavares? What's the deal with Corey Crawford? What will Vegas do with all of that cap space? We dig in.
You'll note there wasn't a player on my ballot whose team didn't qualify for the Stanley Cup playoffs. The Hart Trophy winner is "the player judged most valuable to his team." Value is a malleable concept. In my interpretation, seasons in which teams make the postseason cut are valuable, while seasons in which teams miss the playoffs are disappointments (unless it was losing with purpose). But value's definition has also been established within the context of the Hart: No player in the past 50 years whose team missed the playoffs by, just to throw out a number here, 17 points got a sniff of the award. Which is to say that value, as defined here, is relative to team success and always has been -- hence a player such as Connor McDavid wins the MVP last season and misses the cut with a statistically stronger season in 2017-18 because the Oilers were also-rans. Don't like it? Change the wording of the award.
As for my ballot, Taylor Hall had a transformative effect on the Devils this season, finally actualizing into the complete, 200-foot player he has promised to become while carrying the battle flag in the dressing room. He had 39 goals and 93 points, which were 41 better than the team's second-leading scorer, Nico Hischier. And while your cries of "recency bias!" will echo, I'm sorry: 19 points in 11 games during the Devils' frantic push for a wild-card spot to end the season have to be acknowledged as heavy lifting at a critical time.
Even without McDavid, it was an incredible field for the award. MacKinnon had the numbers argument (1.31 points per game in 74 games). Kopitar was everything for the Kings, including 31 points better than second-leading scorer Dustin Brown, whose point output was thanks to Kopitar. Giroux was great and great in playing a different position for the Flyers. Wheeler did much the same when injuries forced him to fill in at center, and the Jets players credited him with being the foundation on which they built their stellar season.
So many good choices, provided their contributions went to consequential seasons for their teams rather than 36-win flops that immediately entered the trash bin of hockey history.
Emily's ballot
1. Nathan MacKinnon, Colorado Avalanche
2. Taylor Hall, New Jersey Devils
3. Alex Ovechkin, Washington Capitals
4. Anze Kopitar, Los Angeles Kings
5. Claude Giroux, Philadelphia Flyers
The "player judged to be the most valuable to his team"? Nathan MacKinnon practically willed the Colorado Avalanche to the playoffs himself -- as the team nearly doubled its point total from 2016-17 -- by scoring 39 goals and tallying 97 points. Yes, Gabriel Landeskog and Mikko Rantanen were fine complements, but MacKinnon was the glue of that line. When he missed time -- an eight-game layoff in February because of an upper-body injury -- the Avalanche were pedestrian, averaging 2.1 goals per game in those contests compared to their season average of 3.1.
MacKinnon had 77 primary points, two shy of Art Ross leader Connor McDavid, despite playing in eight fewer games. Regarding McDavid, I'm not in the camp that a team absolutely must make the playoffs for a player to win the Hart, but in one of the most crowded fields in recent memory, I had a hard time justifying McDavid over so many quality candidates.
It was a close call over Taylor Hall. Neither the Avalanche nor Devils had a standout goalie, and both Hall and MacKinnon were surrounded by a group of youngsters. Alex Ovechkin doesn't get the credit he deserves as the true pulse of the Capitals. Of course he led the league in goals (49), and remember this was after the team parted with two top-six forwards last offseason. But consider: Ovechkin accounted for 19.1 percent of the Capitals' goal this season. Anze Kopitar had 31 more points than his next closest teammate while providing strong defensive play. Giroux, too, was spectacular in all facets of his game as the Flyers outperformed expectations.
Awarded to the defense player who demonstrates throughout the season the greatest all-round ability in the position.
Winner: Victor Hedman
Emily's ballot
1. Victor Hedman, Tampa Bay Lightning
2. Drew Doughty, Los Angeles Kings
3. Seth Jones, Columbus Blue Jackets
4. P.K. Subban, Nashville Predators
5. John Carlson, Washington Capitals
The Norris tends to skew toward offensive defensemen, and yes, Hedman tied for the league lead among defensemen with 17 goals and finished fifth in points (63). He quarterbacked a power play that ranked third in the league and was just as important on the penalty kill, shouldering 2:35 short-handed minutes per game. He was the No. 1 shutdown guy on a team that limited other teams to fewer than 30 shots per game. In my mind, Hedman did just about everything well, and that's why he's No. 1 on my list.
Doughty led the league in ice time (26:50) and was the star of the stingiest defensive team in the league. He has slightly better Corsi for percentage and relative Corsi numbers than Hedman, and to be frank, I flip-flopped a few times on whom to choose for the top slot. I loved watching Jones this season and felt his offensive numbers were a great complement to his rugged defensive play; he rarely gets beaten. John Klingberg was atop my radar to begin the season, but a second-half tail-off (coinciding with an utter collapse by the Stars) bumped him out of the top five.
Greg's ballot
1. P.K. Subban, Nashville Predators
2. Victor Hedman, Tampa Bay Lightning
3. Drew Doughty, Los Angeles Kings
4. Seth Jones, Columbus Blue Jackets
5. John Carlson, Washington Capitals
Context, context, context. Subban was eighth in points among defensemen with 59, but 33 of them came at even strength, and Subban started only 42.5 percent of his shifts in the offensive zone. He was 21st in ice time with 24:07 per game, but the vast majority of it was spent dragging around Alexei Emelin like the anchor. He was an elite shutdown defenseman whose impact went far beyond traditional measurements. In some ways, his nomination as a finalist was a victory in itself for voters screaming for a more nuanced approach to the award.
To that end: The numbers didn't always support Hedman's seemingly predestined candidacy this season, but his second-half metrics were fantastic, and his impact in all facets of the game aced the eye test, too. His plus-25 goals-for at even-strength was best among the finalists. Doughty led the league in ice (26:50) and was a possession monster again (52.76 corsi rating) against the toughest competition, but I put him just a notch below these two. Jones was stellar, and Carlson's incredible (walk year) season nudged him ahead of John Klingberg, who unfortunately played himself off the ballot after an incredible first half.
Awarded to the goalie who is judged to be the best at this position. Please note that the NHL general managers vote on this, so this is just what our ballots would look like.
Winner: Pekka Rinne
Greg's ballot
1. Pekka Rinne, Nashville Predators
2. John Gibson, Anaheim Ducks
3. Sergei Bobrovsky, Columbus Blue Jackets
4. Andrei Vasilevskiy, Tampa Bay Lightning
5. Connor Hellebuyck, Winnipeg Jets
Luckily for Rinne, the postseason doesn't factor into this award, so his playoff self-destructions are an issue separate from his stellar regular season. Rinne finished with an NHL-best .939 save percentage in 59 appearances and led all goaltenders with a quality starts percentage of 67.8 (minimum 45 games). He was absolutely outstanding and deserved this award -- again, in the regular season.
Gibson was robbed, to be honest. He started 60 games and posted a .927 even-strength save percentage beyond a leaky Ducks defense (33.1 shots against per game, sixth highest in the NHL), with 65 percent of them quality starts. He was phenomenal. Bobrovsky started strong, slumped a bit in December and then roared to the finish with a 9-2-0 March (.933 save percentage). Vasilevskiy, meanwhile, was knocked down a slot on my ballot for the late-season stumble he had. I have no problem with Hellebuyck as a finalist, since Marc-Andre Fleury just didn't have the work rate (46 games) to warrant a spot on the ballot.
Emily's ballot
1. Pekka Rinne, Nashville Predators
2. Andrei Vasilevskiy, Tampa Bay Lightning
3. Connor Hellebuyck, Winnipeg Jets
4. John Gibson, Anaheim Ducks
5. Sergei Bobrovsky, Columbus Blue Jackets
I had no qualms whatsoever putting Rinne as No. 1. He paced the NHL with eight shutouts, and his .927 save percentage led all goalies who played a minimum 50 games. He was mostly terrific down the stretch and lights-out over his final 25 games (.931 save percentage, five shutouts, 19 wins). Conversely, Vasilevskiy was my runaway favorite for the first half of the season; he had seven shutouts by the All-Star break. He didn't necessarily unravel in the second half -- his regression was probably fatigue in his first full year as a starter -- but other goaltenders were better.
Hellebuyck led all goaltenders in minutes (3,965:54) and tied Vasilevskiy with 44 wins. The Jets' goaltender was by far the most consistent all season -- he didn't have a bad month -- but some of his stats gave me pause, such as his adjusted save percentage ranking only sixth among goalies with at least 3,000 minutes or his low save percentage in low-danger situations.
Gibson could have challenged for the top three. For a team hobbled by injuries and allowing a whopping 33.1 shots per game, Gibson kept the ship afloat. Bobrovsky had some rough stretches but finished with the second-best even-strength shooting percentage to Rinne. Marc-Andre Fleury (46 starts) and maybe even Antti Raanta (47) would have received consideration had they played more.
Awarded to the player selected as the most proficient in his first year of competition.
Winner: Mathew Barzal
Emily's ballot
1. Mathew Barzal, New York Islanders
2. Charlie McAvoy, Boston Bruins
3. Kyle Connor, Winnipeg Jets
4. Brock Boeser, Vancouver Canucks
5. Alex DeBrincat, Chicago Blackhawks
I'm bothered that Boston Bruins defenseman Charlie McAvoy is not a Calder Trophy finalist. McAvoy shouldered big responsibilities in Boston, and did so with ease. Among rookies with 50 or more games, McAvoy's 22:09 minutes per game should hold significance; the next closest challengers (Ryan Pulock and Robert Hagg) didn't crack 18:30.
In the past 25 years, only four defensemen have won the Calder. This, to me, is nothing more than a positional bias. That said, Barzal (the only rookie who finished with higher than a point-per-game pace) is my runaway leader. Connor's late push won me over. Not only was he playing on Winnipeg's top line -- for a team that broke franchise records and finished with the second-best record in the league -- but he also had 22 points in his final 25 games. His 31 goals led all rookies. He should have been top three.
Greg's ballot
1. Mathew Barzal, New York Islanders
2. Charlie McAvoy, Boston Bruins
3. Brock Boeser, Vancouver Canucks
4. Kyle Connor, Winnipeg Jets
5. Clayton Keller, Arizona Coyotes
Or "The Sample Size Referendum." Barzal was the season's best rookie, full stop, with 85 points in 82 games for the Islanders despite not playing with John Tavares, which is remarkable. He played 82 games. So did Clayton Keller.
The problem for many voters is that both Brock Boeser (62 games) and Charlie McAvoy (63 games) did not. This was not a problem for me: McAvoy was the second-best rookie of the season and the best at his position, leading all rookies with 22:09 average ice time (min. 30 games); Boeser was second in points per game (0.89) and in goals (29), playing with a variety of linemates because of injury. Connor led all rookies in goals (31), and Keller rallied with 13 points in 14 games to end the season, as long as we're talking about recency bias.
Awarded to the player judged to have exhibited the best type of sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct combined with a high standard of playing ability.
Winner: William Karlsson
Greg's ballot
1. Ryan O'Reilly, Buffalo Sabres
2. William Karlsson, Vegas Golden Knights
3. Jared Spurgeon, Minnesota Wild
4. Anze Kopitar, Los Angeles Kings
5. Alex Pietrangelo, St. Louis Blues
As demonstrated here, PHWA voters are complete know-it-alls who would never concede that they're ill-equipped to judge any of these NHL awards. Except for the Lady Byng. We have no business voting for this award. The NHL Officials Association, the ones with an intimate view of sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct on a nightly basis, are far more qualified and should be handed the reins of this award going forward.
All that said: O'Reilly had one minor penalty in 81 regular-season games, playing tough minutes and managing not to take out his simmering frustration with the Sabres' fortunes on an unsuspecting peer. That's Lady Byng material, right there.
Emily's ballot
1. William Karlsson, Vegas Golden Knights
2. Aleksander Barkov, Florida Panthers
3. Connor McDavid, Edmonton Oilers
4. Auston Matthews, Toronto Maple Leafs
5. Alex Pietrangelo, St. Louis Blues
William Karlsson scored 43 goals and 78 points this season, led all Vegas forwards skating 18:43 per game, played in all 82 games and totaled just 12 minutes of penalties for the season.
I'm with Greg, in that I'm not sure we as hockey reporters are fully qualified to vote for this award. I'd love to have on-ice referees submit nominations in which they list concrete examples of when players demonstrated good sportsmanship. But until then, we'll have to go off the criteria we know.
If you think the Calder has a positional bias, I present to you the Lady Byng: Brian Campbell is the only defenseman to win since the 1950s. Pietrangelo, the Blues captain, got my vote at five.
Awarded to the forward who best excels in the defensive aspects of the game.
Winner: Anze Kopitar
Emily's ballot
1. Anze Kopitar, Los Angeles Kings
2. Sean Couturier, Philadelphia Flyers
3. Patrice Bergeron, Boston Bruins
4. Aleksander Barkov, Florida Panthers
5. Mikko Koivu, Minnesota Wild
This one was tricky. Bergeron missed 18 games, but he had the league's best Corsi for percentage (minimum 600 minutes played) at 57.68 percent and stood out in a few other categories, such as faceoff percentage while short-handed (58.3 percent). If he plays a full season, he gets my top vote.
Instead, it's Kopitar, who was a strong consideration for Hart after scoring a career-high 35 goals and leading all forwards in ice time (22:05 per game) and was one of the league's most responsible forwards and penalty killers -- for the league's best penalty kill, I might add. He took a whopping 37 percent of the Kings' faceoffs.
Couturier, like Kopitar, logged a lot of minutes and put up a career-best goal total. His Corsi was slightly better than Kopitar's, actually. Barkov had a few things going for him, including ranking second in the league in defensive zone faceoff wins (371).
Greg's ballot
1. Mikko Koivu, Minnesota Wild
2. Sean Couturier, Philadelphia Flyers
3. Radek Faksa, Dallas Stars
4. Patrice Bergeron, Boston Bruins
5. Aleksander Barkov, Florida Panthers
The Selke Trophy is wide-open for a number of interpretations, and clearly my interpretation of Koivu's incredible season didn't sync up with how others chose to interpret it. But if we're talking about the league's best defensive forward in 2017-18, I think it's Koivu.
This wasn't an easy vote. At the start of April, I thought Bergeron would sit atop my ballot. But the more I looked at Koivu, the more I liked his case. His Corsi for percentage was 3.5 percentage points higher than that of his teammates, despite his starting 42.5 percent of his shifts in the offensive zone. (Bergeron started 59.4 percent in the O-zone, the highest of his career.) He had a demonstrable advantage over Bergeron in high-danger shot attempts, at 61.61 percent to 48.29 percent. His expected goals plus/minus was plus-13.51, higher than anyone else's on this ballot. He was a more than respectable 51.4 percent on faceoffs, with the acknowledgement that Bergeron is a faceoff deity (57.3 percent.) Koivu also led all Wild forwards in short-handed ice time. He had only 45 points in 82 games, and for whatever reason, the Selke has become an award that values point totals as much as goal suppression. Andrew Berkshire of Sportsnet goes a bit more in depth on that notion here.
Why Bergeron fourth? Again, I was more impressed with Couturier (his two-way game and faceoff wins drove the Flyers at both ends) and the unheralded Faksa, who was plus-17 in goals for/against at even strength, despite starting just 33.4 percent of his shifts in the attacking zone. Daniel Day-Lewis can't win every Oscar, and Bergeron shouldn't win every Selke. Barkov, who's going to get one of these at some point, gets in over Kopitar, who ended up being a finalist, because the Selke is the awards equivalent of the shoulder shrug emoji.
Awarded to the coach judged to have contributed the most to his team's success. Please note that the NHL Broadcasters Association votes on this, so this is just what our ballots would look like.
Winner: Gerard Gallant
Greg's ballot
1. Gerard Gallant, Vegas Golden Knights
2. Jared Bednar, Colorado Avalanche
3. John Hynes, New Jersey Devils
4. Bruce Cassidy, Boston Bruins
5. Peter Laviolette, Nashville Predators
Can someone win an award by the end of October? Because Gallant basically did. Bednar and Hynes both found vindication en route to getting their teams back into the postseason, and Cassidy oversaw a collection of veterans and young talent through an early season malaise before everything clicked.
Emily's ballot
1. Gerard Gallant, Vegas Golden Knights
2. Jared Bednar, Colorado Avalanche
3. John Hynes, New Jersey Devils
4. John Stevens, Los Angeles Kings
5. Bruce Cassidy, Boston Bruins
Gerard Gallant deserves this. He is a clear-cut winner for obvious reasons, boiled down to this: He took a team that had 500-to-1 Cup odds last summer to the Stanley Cup Final.
In any other year, Bednar would be recognized. He nearly doubled his team's win total -- and did most of the damage this season after management traded one of his best players, Matt Duchene. Likewise, Hynes galvanized a bunch of youngsters who had no business competing for a playoff spot.
As impressive as the Bruins' season was, I have John Stevens slotted above Cassidy. Everyone in the league pitted the Kings as too old and too slow. With virtually the same roster the team had last season, the Kings appeared like a brand new (much quicker) team. Dustin Brown's career was revived. Anze Kopitar set a career high in goals. Bottom line: Stevens had everyone buying in. And that's what makes a good coach.
Emily's ballot
Center: Nathan MacKinnon, Colorado Avalanche; Anze Kopitar, Los Angeles Kings; Evgeni Malkin, Pittsburgh Penguins
Right wing: Patrik Laine, Winnipeg Jets; Nikita Kucherov, Tampa Bay Lightning; Phil Kessel, Pittsburgh Penguins
Left wing: Taylor Hall, New Jersey Devils; Alex Ovechkin, Washington Capitals; Claude Giroux, Philadelphia Flyers
Defense: Drew Doughty, Los Angeles Kings; Victor Hedman, Tampa Bay Lightning; Seth Jones, Columbus Blue Jackets; P.K. Subban, Nashville Predators; John Carlson, Washington Capitals; Brent Burns San Jose Sharks
Goaltender: Pekka Rinne, Nashville Predators; Andrei Vasilevskiy, Tampa Bay Lightning; Connor Hellebuyck, Winnipeg Jets
Greg's ballot
Center: Connor McDavid, Edmonton Oilers; Nathan MacKinnon, Colorado Avalanche; Evgeni Malkin, Pittsburgh Penguins
Right wing: Nikita Kucherov, Tampa Bay Lightning; Phil Kessel, Pittsburgh Penguins; Blake Wheeler, Winnipeg Jets
Left wing: Taylor Hall, New Jersey Devils; Alex Ovechkin, Washington Capitals; Claude Giroux, Philadelphia Flyers
Defense: P.K. Subban, Nashville Predators; Victor Hedman, Tampa Bay Lightning; Drew Doughty, Los Angeles Kings; Seth Jones, Columbus Blue Jackets; John Carlson, Washington Capitals; John Klingberg, Dallas Stars.
Goaltender: Pekka Rinne, Nashville Predators; Sergei Bobrovsky, Columbus Blue Jackets; John Gibson, Anaheim Ducks
Greg's ballot
Forward: Mathew Barzal, New York Islanders; Brock Boeser, Vancouver Canucks; Kyle Connor, Winnipeg Jets
Defense: Charlie McAvoy, Boston Bruins; Will Butcher, New Jersey Devils
Goaltender: Juuse Saros, Nashville Predators
Emily's ballot
Forward: Mathew Barzal, New York Islanders; Brock Boeser, Vancouver Canucks; Kyle Connor, Winnipeg Jets
Defense: Charlie McAvoy, Boston Bruins; Will Butcher New Jersey Devils
Goaltender: Tristan Jarry, Pittsburgh Penguins

Nashville Predators forward Austin Watson has been charged with domestic assault, the Franklin (Tennessee) Police Department confirmed to ESPN on Wednesday.
Watson, 26, was arrested at 7:20 p.m. Saturday in Franklin. He is free on a $4,500 bond and is due in court June 28.
According to a Williamson County court affidavit obtained by The Associated Press, a Franklin police officer was flagged down by a witness to a possible domestic situation at a gas station. The officer noticed the passenger of a car "trying to back away from being shoved away." The report said the passenger said "stop" and was trying to cover her face.
Watson told police he and his girlfriend were having an argument and he admitted to pushing her. Officers said they found red marks on the woman's chest, and she said Watson had caused them.
According to The Associated Press, the affidavit says domestic assault is considered a Class A misdemeanor.
NHL deputy commissioner Bill Daly said in a statement that the league is aware of the situation and "it will be dealt with in due course and prior to next season."
Daly added "our focus currently is on the well-being and safety of Austin's girlfriend, their child and Austin himself. "
The team on Wednesday issued a statement saying it was aware of the incident.
"We are still gathering facts and it is not appropriate for us to comment further at this time, but this is a matter that we are taking very seriously and will cooperate fully with the investigation by law enforcement," the statement said. "The Nashville Predators have and will continue to stand side by side with AMEND in the fight to end violence against women."
The AMEND Together initiative (formerly called MEND) is a program of YWCA Nashville and Middle Tennessee, dedicated to ending violence against women through education. In 2017, Watson joined teammates Ryan Ellis, Mike Fisher and PK Subban as part of a public awareness campaign titled "Unsilence the Violence." In conjunction, the Nashville Predators Foundation pledged $500,000 to MEND.
Watson, selected by the Predators with the 18th overall pick in the 2010 draft, set a career-high in goals (14) and points (19) last season as Nashville won the Presidents' Trophy for the league's best record.
He scored eight points in 13 playoff games. Nashville was eliminated in the second round by the Winnipeg Jets.
Watson signed a three-year, $3.3 million contract last July. He has 23 goals and 24 assists in 216 career regular-season games, all with the Predators.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Eight months before his second term ended, a pesky narrative clung to Bill Clinton: The President wasn’t just a lame duck; he was lonely. The Vice President was campaigning for a promotion, the First Lady for a Senate seat, and advisors were scattering to line up post-administration gigs. Clinton was resigned to dark nights at the White House, with nobody to talk to but the portraits on the wall.
Naturally, this suggestion irked Joe Lockhart, Clinton’s chief spin doctor. It was the White House press secretary’s job to push the president’s agenda, shape his message. As so Lockhart, a former television producer and the son of journalists, concocted a way to turn the narrative to Clinton’s favor.


“If Lockhart knows anything,” says Peter Maer, the veteran CBS White House correspondent (who had a one-line cameo in the video), “it’s how to control a narrative.”
Sixteen years have passed since Lockhart—a key strategist for Clinton during the Monica Lewinsky scandal and the resulting impeachment—left the White House. He helped launch a D.C. communication strategy firm, Glover Park Group, which grew into a national PR powerhouse. Lockhart left GPG twice. He joined tech giant Oracle in 2000 at a time when CEO Larry Ellison was absorbing backlash for spying on competitor Microsoft. He rejoined GPG, then beginning in 2011 served a 15-month stint with Facebook as the company prepared to go public.
Now Lockhart takes on his heftiest public relations challenge since the Clinton administration. In January he replaced Paul Hicks as the NFL’s vice president of communications. The job, as described by Hicks, is “to manage the league’s reputation.” That’s an amorphous role in an organization of 5,000, covering issues ranging from inappropriate Instagrams to criminal behavior to Washington litigation. But the most defined of Lockhart’s responsibilities is also his most difficult: repair Roger Goodell’s image.
Six months in, according to several people interviewed for this story, Lockhart has found that to be a hurdle. (Lockhart declined comment for this piece.) The perception of Goodell—that the commissioner is obstinate, heavy-handed and overpaid—is pervasive. According to a February survey by Public Policy Polling, only 19% of self-described NFL fans had a favorable opinion of Goodell and 28% approved of the job the he is doing. The PR chief has lamented to friends that attacking Goodell has become too trendy, and it is his job to make the commissioner look less like a caricature. Lockhart’s creativity will go only as far as Goodell will let him. So the first step: Get the commissioner to listen.
* * *
“Knowing Joe,” Maer surmises, “he would not have taken the NFL job to be a PR flack for the commissioner.” It is fair to assume those were promises assured to Lockhart upon taking the job. He never had a formal interview.
Lockhart began working with the NFL as a consultant for GPG in 2014. On the Monday after Week 1 of the season, as the Ray Rice scandal spiraled out of control following the release of a video showing Rice striking his fiancée inside a casino elevator, Lockhart arrived at 345 Park Avenue. For the better part of four months, he spent long hours there, consulting with Goodell on best practices and offering suggestions.
During one meeting, Lockhart was trying to catch himself up when he interrupted the group. “Wait,” he said. “Do we have a group that looks at setting rules and setting penalties on the field?”
“Yes,” was the response.
“Well, wouldn’t we need something similar for off the field too?”
A few top executives were lukewarm to the idea. But Goodell, according to a source, liked it immediately. The new personal conduct policy was developed, and put in place later that season.

“When I saw that,” Maer says. “I knew instantly: That was vintage Lockhart.”
But how much freedom is Goodell going to allow, and is that enough to satisfy Lockhart? There are inherent differences between a U.S. president and the NFL commissioner, and while Lockhart helped Clinton—as his GPG co-founder Joel Johnson explains—“come through, and come through more popular than ever,” Goodell’s reputation seems stuck. White House approval ratings are famously fluid, but is there one single event that would sway the public’s opinion in favor of Goodell? Consider the most drastic decisions Goodell could make before the season opener: admit he took Deflategate too far, demand Dan Snyder change the name of his franchise, loosen the restriction on use of marijuana by players. Would that change your opinion? Or are too many scars already formed?

* * *
“I often ask what genius would want a second White House term,” says Ann Compton, who covered the White House for 40 years, seven presidents and 10 campaign cycles for ABC. “And the second term for Clinton was a very tumultuous time. It was one of the roughest stretches for a press secretary, ever.”
That’s best distilled by one hectic day: December 19, 1998. Lockhart arrived to work knowing that Clinton was up for an impeachment vote. But then the script veered.
At 11:30 a.m., Speaker of the House Bob Livingston admitted an affair and announced his resignation. Within 15 minutes, Lockhart knew—as he recalled in a 2005 speaking engagement at the New York Public Library—“the drumbeat of political pundits” would cry for Clinton to resign as well, so he raced to the Oval Office to help Clinton craft a statement. An hour later, Lockhart was pulled into another meeting: The Defense Department wanted to declare a victory after bombing Iraq. “You’ve got to be f---ing kidding me,” Lockhart told security advisors. “A week ago, you had me go out and say, ‘We found out we’re going to get impeached, and now we’re launching a war.’ And today, you want me to say, ‘Yeah, we got impeached and yes we won the war?’”

After dusk, Lockhart retreated to his office. A co-worker handed him a beer. “You know,” the friend said. “Except for getting impeached, we had a pretty good day.”

Since the PR fiasco that was the 2014 season, the NFL has increasingly adopted a Washington mindset. The league has relied on the New York public relations firm Rubenstein but increasingly is billing GPG. In conjunction with Lockhart, the NFL tapped former Joe Biden aide Cynthia Hogan for a senior vice president role. But in Lockhart, the league adds a true Beltway insider. Earlier this year the Obamas secured their post-White House digs. They will rent a nine-bedroom, eight-bathroom mansion in the Kalorama neighborhood of D.C.—a house owned by Lockhart.

* * *
Goodell’s greatest strength as commissioner is his unparalleled knowledge of the league. He has essentially never worked anywhere else. That, too, is his biggest vulnerability.
If the commissioner wants to rehab the league’s image, he needs to give Lockhart a seat at the table—and a microphone, too. That’s how it went at the White House. “The press secretaries who are most effective are those who are intimately involved in the creation and formation of policy,” says Compton, the ABC journalist. “Joe found himself, especially at times of crisis, in the heart of discussions, staff cabinet meetings and Roosevelt room strategy sessions.”
Adds Myers in regards to the White House job: “The volume of information you're responsible for in a day… There’s a lot going on in the world, and somehow the White House is responsible for about half of it. The way it worked with [Clinton’s administration] is you get that information, and you help shape the narrative by being part of conversations.”
Lockhart was close to Clinton. “I can’t tell you the number of times we would land on Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base late at night, window is open and you’d see Joe and Clinton sitting there finishing up a hearts game,” says Maer, the CBS journalist. (Lockhart had never played hearts before he took the job but picked it up when he found out it was the president’s game of choice. Clinton reportedly called his new press chief out after a few games: “Everyone who learns from the computer makes the same moves.”)
Clinton relied on Lockhart as an advisor, especially during the Monica Lewinsky scandal. Lockhart’s predecessor, Mike McCurry, sustained the bulk of the Lewinsky investigation and was intentionally kept dark on details, so he was not responsible for answering press queries. On Lockhart’s first day as press secretary, the House Judiciary Committee recommended the impeachment inquiry. Lockhart attacked the issue head on. In his old White House office, there was a political cartoon of Clinton holding up two dolls. One was labeled McCurry, with arrows pointing every which way. The other labeled Lockhart, and had one word written across the chest: “Next?”
Several people interviewed for this story related instances of Lockhart ripping into reporters. But they also described him as accessible; a man who would take any late-night phone call, talk at end about his then-grade school daughter, Clare, his beloved Mets and Bruce Springsteen. At the conclusion of his stint as press secretary for the failed 1988 Michael Dukakis presidential bid, the candidate and press corps rode the campaign plane to his concession speech. Lockhart tried to lighten spirits, commanding the PA system as if it were his own Springsteen-only karaoke machine.

Conversely, press secretaries increasingly relied on the tool of wit: whipping up sound bites that both appeased producers and took the edge off. Lockhart was known to be expert at this, even when he served as deputy to McCurry. When Rep. Dan Burton, Republican chairman of the House Oversight Committee, called Clinton a “scumbag,” Clinton “chose to ignore” the comment. Meanwhile, Lockhart fed a line to McCurry: “Chairman Burton’s use of a two-syllable vulgarity was rather ambitious.” That quote overwrote the headline.

* * *
America’s greatest sports juggernaut has never appeared more vulnerable. It’s not just Goodell’s fragile reputation that Lockhart must manage. Relations between the league and the NFLPA, halfway through their most recent collective bargaining agreement, are revealing signs of fracture yet again. Health and player safety issues and litigation continue to loom. If anyone is suited to steer the narrative in the league’s favor, it is Lockhart.
He left his White House post in September 2000, before Clinton’s term ended. This isn’t exactly uncommon for a press secretary. Myers describes the job as mentally exhausting—consider, for example, that the press secretary is expected to accompany the president on all foreign trips—and it is difficult to balance a family life. Some also believed Lockhart wanted to give his deputy, Jake Siewert, a chance before Clinton left Washington.
In announcing Lockhart’s resignation, Clinton addressed the press corps. “Most people think Joe’s leaving for purely selfish, monetary reasons,” the president said. “But the truth is, he told me that I was no longer in enough trouble to make it interesting for him.”
The NFL hopes for the day when their commissioner can deliver a line like that.


The Washington Capitals have finally won a Stanley Cup. Are they primed to make another deep run in 2018-19? The ESPN power panel -- a group of 25 writers, editors and TV personalities -- is already looking ahead to next season with a way-too-early edition of the NHL Power Rankings. Here's how we think the league will stack up in 2018-19.
Note: These rankings reflect which teams the voters think would win head-to-head matchups. Higher-ranked teams would be favored against lower-ranked teams. ESPN Stats & Information contributed the following "what defined them" information.

2017-18 record: 54-23-5
What defined them: The Lightning advanced to the Eastern Conference finals for the third time in four seasons, but the ultimate prize eluded them again. They set franchise records for wins (54) and points (113), but their lasting memory will be getting shut out by the Capitals in Games 6 and 7 of the conference finals.
What could change: Ryan Callahan said the Lightning played Game 6 against Washington like they knew they had a Game 7 left. Tampa Bay also knew that this group has one more year together to make another a Cup run before Nikita Kucherov, Brayden Point, Ryan McDonagh, Anton Stralman and others all need new contracts.
2017-18 record: 53-18-11
What defined them: The Predators won the Presidents' Trophy for the first time in franchise history, earning 23 more points than they did the season before. A second-round playoff exit at the hands of the Winnipeg Jets left a sour note in Music City, though -- especially after the Preds reached the Stanley Cup Final in 2017.
What could change: They were excellent in 2017-18, but then they fizzled out in the playoffs. Perhaps GM David Poile will look to make some small tweaks, but there's no reason to doubt this team as a serious contender again next season.Editor's PicksHow the Capitals defend the Stanley CupThe Capitals have won the Stanley Cup. Here are three key steps they should take to help defend it next year.The Golden Knights' offseason game planThe Golden Knights' magical playoff run ended a few games earlier than they'd like. Here's how they maintain the momentum for 2018-19.Why hockey players don't say 'I'Is it hockey culture ingrained at a young age? Is it force of habit? We checked the locker rooms for answers -- and whether the trend will ever change.2 Related
The Capitals have won the Stanley Cup. Here are three key steps they should take to help defend it next year.
The Golden Knights' magical playoff run ended a few games earlier than they'd like. Here's how they maintain the momentum for 2018-19.
Is it hockey culture ingrained at a young age? Is it force of habit? We checked the locker rooms for answers -- and whether the trend will ever change.
2017-18 record: 52-20-10
What defined them: After missing the 2017 playoffs by seven points, the Jets had the league's second-best record and advanced to the Western Conference finals this year. Not bad for a franchise that didn't even have a playoff win before this season. Patrik Laine has already scored 80 goals in his first two NHL seasons -- and he only turned 20 in April.
What could change: Everything points to the Jets being a team to beat over the next four or five seasons. All of the pieces are there (though a lot of them will need to be paid). Winnipeg should grow as a result of its 2017-18 success and playoff run.
2017-18 record: 49-26-7
What defined them: After so many years of underachieving in the playoffs, the Capitals exorcised plenty of demons. In the nation's capital, the certainties include death, taxes and Alex Ovechkin winning the Rocket Richard Trophy. The latter has happened seven times, five more than anyone else.
What could change: It will take some finagling, but if the Capitals can re-sign John Carlson, this team could contend for another Stanley Cup next season. In an alternate universe, the Capitals suffer another early playoff ouster in 2019 and players like Nicklas Backstrom end up on the trading block.
2017-18 record: 51-24-7
What defined them: After a season that exceeded their wildest expectations, it could be an interesting summer for the Golden Knights. James Neal, David Perron and Ryan Reaves will all be unrestricted free agents -- and William Karlsson will get a big raise. But the team has lots of cap space.
What could change: Owner Bill Foley has indicated that the Golden Knights' meteoric rise to the Western Conference title won't be a one-and-done situation, which means Vegas could potentially use its bevy of draft picks over the next three seasons and considerable cap space to take a run at everyone from Erik Karlsson to John Carlson to John Tavares.
2017-18 record: 50-20-12
What defined them: The Bruins' top line of Patrice Bergeron, Brad Marchand and David Pastrnak might be the league's best. All three players scored at least 30 goals, but no one else on the team had more than 17. Despite a second-round loss to the Lightning, this team felt good about its 50-win season.
What could change: Bergeron, Marchand and David Krejci are all in their 30s. Zdeno Chara is 41. But the Bruins' combination of these veteran players and dynamic youngsters like Pastrnak and Charlie McAvoy will make them a title contender in 2018-19.
2017-18 record: 47-29-6
What defined them: Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin are signed long term, so the Penguins should once again be in the hunt for Lord Stanley's Cup. Pittsburgh became the first team since the 2003-04 Lightning to have three players finish among the top 10 in scoring (Malkin, Phil Kessel and Crosby).
What could change: They didn't three-peat, but after a summer of rest (something they're not used to of late), expect Crosby and Malkin to come back as strong as ever. Goalie Matt Murray is poised to rebound after a somewhat shaky 2017-18.
2017-18 record: 45-27-10
What defined them: The Sharks have produced 98, 99 and 100 points, respectively, in their past three seasons under coach Peter DeBoer. For the second consecutive summer, they'll have a decision to make on franchise stalwart Joe Thornton, who didn't play after Jan. 23 because of a torn ACL and MCL.
What could change: The window is wide open for the Sharks next season to win their first Stanley Cup. Then things get really interesting, as they only have nine players (!) currently under contract for 2019-20, pending a few free-agent deals this summer. Both Logan Couture and Joe Pavelski will be unrestricted free agents in 2019.
2017-18 record: 45-30-7
What defined them: The good news? The Blue Jackets reached the postseason in consecutive years for the first time in franchise history. The bad news? They're still looking to get past the first round. Columbus' biggest summer concern is top scorer Artemi Panarin (27 goals, 82 points), who is entering his free-agent walk year.
What could change: The Blue Jackets need to do two things this offseason: lock in Panarin and acquire depth scoring. The development of Pierre-Luc Dubois bodes well for this team, which is still on the cusp of breaking out.The Stanley Cup playoffs on ESPNStanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGSConference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJRound 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ

Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
2017-18 record: 46-24-7
What defined them: The Maple Leafs continued their upward trajectory, posting franchise records in wins (49) and points (105). New general manager Kyle Dubas, 31, will have a busy summer, which could include contract extensions for Auston Matthews and Mitch Marner.
What could change: Is there a rift between coach Mike Babcock and Matthews? Will the Leafs make a pitch for an elite-level defenseman? Can Dubas run the show himself, now that former GM Lou Lamoriello and former assistant GM Mark Hunter took their pucks and went home after Dubas was promoted? So many questions remain in the Centre of the Hockey Universe.
2017-18 record: 44-29-9
What defined them: After finishing last in the Eastern Conference in 2016-17, the Devils snapped a five-year playoff drought this season. Their 27-point improvement, helped by a career-high 39 goals from Hart Trophy finalist Taylor Hall, was the largest in franchise history.
What could change: There's no reason these 2017-18 overachievers should regress next season. As long as GM Ray Shero makes defensive depth a priority, and other scorers not named Taylor Hall emerge, we're looking at another playoff team.
2017-18 record: 45-29-8
What defined them: The Kings mustered just three goals in getting swept by the Golden Knights in the first round of the playoffs. Anze Kopitar was a Hart finalist, but he was one of just three Kings to score at least 20 goals. Norris Trophy finalist Drew Doughty is entering his walk year.
What could change: Some of us would love to be a king for a day. Doughty will likely be a King for life after the massive contract extension that he and the team are discussing comes to pass.
2017-18 record: 45-26-11
What defined them: The Wild's third consecutive first-round departure in the playoffs cost GM Chuck Fletcher his job after nine seasons. His replacement, Paul Fenton, will inherit a roster that will likely be "retooled" but not "rebuilt."
What could change: This is a team that has been on the verge of a breakthrough for some time. Perhaps Fenton -- who cut his teeth as an assistant GM with the Predators -- will add the right pieces (and subtract the wrong ones) to get the Wild over the hump.
2017-18 record: 43-30-9
What defined them: The Avalanche had an NHL-best 47-point improvement from 2016-17 and made the playoffs this year on the final day of the regular season. Hart Trophy candidate Nathan MacKinnon led the surge with 97 points, the most by any Avs player since Joe Sakic (100) in 2006-07.
What could change: A shockingly decent team last season, the Avalanche will still be young in 2018-19. The worst may be over for Colorado, but the bar is so much higher than it was last season that we're not sure they can meet it.
2017-18 record: 44-32-6
What defined them: Even after they dealt center Paul Stastny to Winnipeg at the trade deadline, the Blues still made a run at the postseason, going 8-1-0 in mid-March. They still had a chance to make the playoffs on the final night of the regular season, but lost 5-2 to the Avalanche.
What could change: We expect the Blues to be aggressive in free agency and pursue a top-line center, as well as a scoring winger. The only problem? There aren't a ton of great names available, especially if St. Louis whiffs on John Tavares. The Blues may be in a stalemate.
2017-18 record: 42-26-14
What defined them: Captain Claude Giroux delivered a strong bounce-back season with 102 points -- becoming the first Flyer to hit the century mark since Eric Lindros in 1995-96. Although they returned to the playoffs after a one-year absence, the Flyers haven't won a postseason series since 2012.
What could change: How soon can Carter Hart play? The stud prospect could be the key to Philadelphia's long-standing goaltending woes. Hart is not far off, but will likely start next season in the AHL, especially considering GM Ron Hextall's perpetual patience.
2017-18 record: 33-39-10
What defined them: The Blackhawks had their fewest points in a season during the Patrick Kane-Jonathan Toews era (76) in 2017-18. Their 3.07 goals-against average was the team's worst since 2005-06 (3.35).
What could change: Let's assume that goalie Corey Crawford is back. Things can't get worse than they were in 2017-18. (If they are, expect a huge shake-up by Christmas.) We're confident that Toews will rebound and that enough youngsters can help plug in and spark this lineup.
2017-18 record: 36-40-6
What defined them: The Oilers finished with 25 fewer points than they did in 2016-17, which was the second-worst point differential in the Western Conference this year. Yet, Connor McDavid played every game and won the Art Ross Trophy with 108 points, the most by an Oilers player since Mark Messier in 1989-90.
What could change: The Oilers are still in the hunt for an elite defenseman to fill out their blue line, among other items on the agenda as Edmonton tries to reverse course from a lackluster season and contend again.
2017-18 record: 44-25-13
What defined them: The Ducks were wounded for much of the season, but Anaheim overcame numerous injuries to make the playoffs for a sixth consecutive year. Only the Penguins (12) have a longer active streak. Anaheim didn't stay long, however -- the Ducks were outscored 16-4 in a four-game sweep by San Jose.
What could change: The Ducks need what the Capitals had this season: an aggressive infusion of youth and fresh perspectives behind the aging talents of Ryan Getzlaf, Corey Perry and whatever is left of Ryan Kesler. But at least they have a blue line and a goalie to build on.
2017-18 record: 42-32-8
What defined them: On March 11, as the Stars started a six-game road trip, they were three points ahead in the wild-card race. Then an 0-4-2 trip and two more home losses all but ended those playoff dreams.
What could change: It's hard to gauge who the Stars will be, considering they're adapting to their third head coach in as many seasons. It might not be pretty at first, as new coach Jim Montgomery implements his style.ESPN On IceGreg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan come to you from the cavernous bowels of the Capital One Center to recap Games 3 and 4 of the Stanley Cup Final, talk to Isabelle Khurshudyan of the Washington Post about the series and share other great stories from the Caps beat. Plus, Greg and Emily talk to NHL draft prospects Filip Zadina and Brady Tkachuk about their journeys and more. Also, the team gets into all of your favorite segments of the week! Listen »

Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan come to you from the cavernous bowels of the Capital One Center to recap Games 3 and 4 of the Stanley Cup Final, talk to Isabelle Khurshudyan of the Washington Post about the series and share other great stories from the Caps beat. Plus, Greg and Emily talk to NHL draft prospects Filip Zadina and Brady Tkachuk about their journeys and more. Also, the team gets into all of your favorite segments of the week! Listen »
2017-18 record: 35-37-10
What defined them: The bad news: The Islanders were last in goals against, with 293, in 2017-18 -- the most they had surrendered in a season since 1995-96 (315). The good news: Mathew Barzal's 63 assists tied an Islanders rookie record, and his 85 points were the most by an NHL rookie since Evgeni Malkin in 2006-07.
What could change: Lamoriello is running the show now. This team isn't very far off if Tavares returns. The Islanders need a goalie and a few defensemen, but they could win next season. If Tavares leaves ... well, then there will be some dark days ahead.
2017-18 record: 36-35-11
What defined them: The Hurricanes were in postseason position in mid-February but finished 9-14-2 to fall out of the playoffs. Scott Darling had the worst save percentage (.888) of any goaltender to appear in 40 games this season.
What could change: After nine years of missing the playoffs, expect a roster shake-up as Carolina commits to a culture change. That means it might get worse before it gets better. Oh, and they need to figure out if Darling can be their No. 1 goalie.
2017-18 record: 44-30-8
What defined them: The Panthers' 52 points (25-8-2) were tied with the Predators for the most after the All-Star break, but it was not enough to reach the playoffs. Aleksander Barkov and Vincent Trocheck were the first pair of Panthers with at least 75 points in a season.
What could change: The core of the team is locked up through 2022, including 39-year-old goalie Roberto Luongo, although we doubt he'll be earning that $1 million base salary in the final year of that contract. The point is: The Panthers know what they're building around, so can GM Dale Tallon fill in those blanks?
2017-18 record: 37-35-10
What defined them: The Flames missed the playoffs for the seventh time in the past nine seasons, thanks in part to scoring a league-worst 1.9 goals per game from Feb. 27 on. The slump cost coach Glen Gulutzan his job.
What could change: This is going to be one of the most fascinating case studies in the NHL. Was Bill Peters hamstrung by bad goaltending and personnel moves in Carolina, only to thrive in Calgary as the Flames' new head coach? Or is it Calgary's system that doesn't work?
2017-18 record: 34-39-9
What defined them: When the Rangers were eliminated on March 27, Henrik Lundqvist played meaningless games for the first time in his career. From Feb. 1 on, the Rangers had the second-worst record in the NHL (a .344 points percentage) behind only the Blackhawks, which contributed to coach Alain Vigneault losing his job.
What could change: Let the rebuilding begin. With new coach David Quinn at the helm, the Rangers are going to commit to a total infusion of youth -- expect a big showcase for top prospects like Filip Chytil and Lias Andersson -- before they are ready to contend again.
2017-18 record: 30-39-13
What defined them: The Red Wings missed the playoffs in consecutive seasons for the first time since a five-season span from 1978-79 to 1982-83. They did get three draft picks, including a 2018 first-round pick from Vegas for Tomas Tatar, who had six points in 20 games with the Golden Knights.
What could change: GM Ken Holland is staying in Detroit, somewhat surprisingly, to get this rebuild going. When Red Wings president Chris Ilitch uses words like "it's going to be a process," well, buckle up for some bumpy rides during the next few years. And is Mike Green coming back, or what?
2017-18 record: 25-45-12
What defined them: The Sabres finished last in their division for the fifth time in the past six seasons and had the worst record in the NHL for the third time in the past five seasons. The good news is they'll pick first in the NHL draft for the first time since 1987 (when they took Pierre Turgeon).
What could change: The 18-year-old Swedish defenseman Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, Rasmus Dahlin, with Rasmus Dahlin and, of course, Rasmus Dahlin. Oh, and the Sabres are probably going to trade Ryan O'Reilly after he revealed he lost his smile.
2017-18 record: 29-40-13
What defined them: The Canadiens lost 40 games in regulation, their most since 2000-01. Montreal's success usually is driven by Carey Price's play, and this year was no different, as he finished with career-worsts in save percentage (.900) and goals-against average (3.11)
What could change: While casting an eye at the John Tavares derby, the entire focus of the Canadiens' offseason appears to be what, if anything, will happen with captain Max Pacioretty, including a potential sign-and-trade as he enters the last year of his previous contract.
2017-18 record: 31-40-11
What defined them: The Canucks have had the worst record in the Western Conference the past three years (.441 points percentage). Now they have to replace Henrik Sedin and Daniel Sedin, who played in 82 and 81 games, respectively, this season at age 37.
What could change: The rebuild is on* and it's spectacular! (*Please note that any celebration about the rebuild is on hold until we see if the Canucks do something forward-thinking and proactive with their seventh overall pick in the draft. Sigh ... as least Elias Pettersson is going to show when he gets to the NHL.)
2017-18 record: 28-43-11
What defined them: The Senators went from being one goal away from the Stanley Cup Final last June to finishing with their fewest points (67) since 1995-96 (41). Erik Karlsson is the only defenseman with 45 assists in each of the past five seasons, but will he remain in Ottawa?
What could change: We could know the fate of Karlsson by July 1, when the Senators hand him what's expected to be a frugal offer -- and Karlsson will have to decide whether to remain in Ottawa or seek a better deal elsewhere. Alas, poor Senators fans, while the billboards worked in Brooklyn, they did not yet for Eugene Melnyk.
2017-18 record: 29-41-12
What defined them: The Coyotes have missed the playoffs each of the past six years since losing to the Kings in the 2012 Western Conference finals. From Feb. 8 on, however, the Coyotes had a 17-9-3 record, which was better than the Golden Knights (16-10-3) and just behind the Capitals (18-9-2).
What could change: Oliver Ekman-Larsson appears ready to sign a long extension, but the work is just starting for GM John Chayka: everything from what to do about restricted free-agent winger Max Domi to whom to draft fifth overall in Dallas later this month.

Welcome to the Lou Lamoriello show, New York Islanders fans.
The veteran executive joined the organization two weeks ago, after relinquishing power with the Toronto Maple Leafs. And it didn't take long for Lamoriello to regain that voice with the Islanders. Lamoriello was officially tabbed as the GM this week, while Garth Snow and head coach Doug Weight were relieved of their duties (though, dubiously, will stay with the organization).
Now Lamoriello has two pressing items on his agenda: retain superstar center John Tavares, and hire a head coach. Here's a primer for some of the names Lamoriello will consider for item No. 2.
There's no rush for the former New York Rangers bench boss to find a new gig. Vigneault had two years remaining on his contract with New York when he was fired this offseason, and is making decent money. Vigneault is a veteran coach whose best work comes with an already-seasoned roster. He's been employed as a head coach by three teams over the last 20 years, and is afforded the luxury of being picky about his next gig.
But with an Islanders roster that is ready to win (if they keep Tavares, add a defenseman or two, and shore up goaltending), the Islanders job might be it.
He's perhaps the sexiest name on the list -- especially with how the Washington Capitals' season has unfolded. It's the league's worst-kept secret that Trotz does not have a contract for next season, and management was likely going to move on from the 55-year-old veteran.
And then Washington kept winning, and suddenly GM Brian MacLellan is in a pickle.
Now, it seems foolish for Washington not to offer Trotz a new deal, especially as he has the respect of his players. But what if he wants to walk away on his own terms? Since New York is the only open vacancy, it's the only place where Trotz can find leverage.
The Capitals star has maintained his devotion to a daily culinary ritual that stretches back to his rookie season.
Heading into the Final, it was all but certain that a Capitals win meant the playoff MVP award would go to Ovechkin. Now? He's got some competition.
Teams that have gone up 3-1 in the Stanley Cup Final have won the series 31 straight times. But don't plan a parade quite yet. Here's why the Golden Knights can still win.
One candidate with whom Lou Lamoriello is quite familiar. Smith has been a Maple Leafs assistant coach since 2015. In March, the NHLPA released a player poll, in which one of the questions was: Which current assistant coach should be the next head coach? Somewhat surprisingly, Smith received the most votes (8.3 percent of respondents).
The 41-year-old could join Paul MacLean, Todd McLellan and Bill Peters as Mike Babcock protégés who graduated to being head coaches.
In that same NHLPA player poll, Reirden finished second to Smith as the current assistant coach who should be a head coach next. And hey, the Capitals agreed -- they were clearly grooming Reirden as Trotz's successor. Washington had been territorial over the 46-year-old Reirden, blocking him from interviewing for head coaching vacancies last offseason (the Caps promoted him to associate head coach a year earlier).
It might be too awkward for Reirden to stay on under Trotz if the latter is re-upped. Reirden has seen what it takes to win the Metropolitan Division; perhaps he can use that intel to boost the Islanders.
Keefe, 37, is currently coaching the Toronto Marlies in the AHL Calder Cup Final, and is someone Lamoriello no doubt knows a bit from their days with the Maple Leafs. Keefe followed GM Kyle Dubas from Sault Ste. Marie in the OHL to Toronto, and they have a mutual affinity for analytics. He's a former NHL player with a tireless drive to succeed. A true rising star ... but one stuck behind a supernova behind the Leafs' bench with a long-term contract, in Mike Babcock.
If would be Christmas morning for the Toronto media if a unified force of Dubas' mentor and his favorite coach turned the Islanders into contenders while the Leafs languished.
Stevens, 54, shared the bench with Lamoriello as two-thirds of that strange coaching hydra in New Jersey for one season, with Adam Oates filling out the group. He also spent a season with the Minnesota Wild as an assistant to Bruce Boudreau.
The captain of three Stanley Cup winners for Lamoriello with the New Jersey Devils, he was expected to play some role with the Islanders after Lou took over what was the worst defensive team in the NHL last season (3.57 goals-against average). Perhaps it will be as an assistant; or perhaps he's ready for the big job.
Like Stevens, a vital member of Stanley Cup championship teams that Lamoriello built, as a checking center. The 43-year-old served as an assistant coach for three seasons with the Florida Panthers, and just completed his second campaign at the helm of the Cleveland Monsters, the AHL affiliate of the Columbus Blue Jackets.
He has the experience, he's a known commodity for Lamoriello and, perhaps most of all, he's an NCAA product. Something, as we know, Lou is rather fond of.
Last seen coaching the 2016-17 Los Angeles Kings, the 59-year-old coach has 1,285 games and two Stanley Cups to his credit. He said last year that he was willing to join either a rebuilding team or a contender as long as he felt the fit was right. Again, his prowess as a puck possession-oriented defensive coach is something the Islanders need, but does Sutter want to live that far away from the ol' farm in Alberta?
One of the more interesting candidates. Bowness was the head coach of the Islanders from 1996 to 1998, failing to make the playoffs in either season. But since then, he was an assistant coach from 2006 to 2013 with the Vancouver Canucks, and spent six seasons as an assistant with the Tampa Bay Lightning, where he was responsible for their defense, before being let go after this season.
The 63-year-old has learned plenty since his early coaching stints in Winnipeg, Boston, Ottawa and Long Island, and was a finalist for the Anaheim job that went to Randy Carlyle. As ex-coaches returning to the big job go, Bowness isn't Peter Laviolette ... but he isn't Mike Milbury, either.
The former head coach of the Arizona Coyotes, the 56-year-old Tippett has been following the NHL closely since his removal in 2017, in anticipation of getting back behind the bench. A defensive-oriented coach who could help with the Islanders' issues on the back end. Keep in mind that Tippett was available in 2010 when Lamoriello needed a coach in New Jersey, but Lou never reached out to him (former Devil John MacLean got the gig).
Oh, now this is fun. Therrien was fired during the 2016-17 season by the Montreal Canadiens, who snatched up Claude Julien to replace him. He's been to the playoffs in five of his last eight seasons ... of course, two of those playoff misses were because he was fired midseason in Pittsburgh and Montreal.
He was rumored to be on Lamoriello's short list in 2010 when the Devils needed a coach. If nothing else, he would satisfy Lou's longstanding Habs fetish. But Therrien, hilariously, does have one more year left on his contract with Montreal; like Vigneault, he's literally being paid not to coach.

The Washington Capitals' Game 4 victory gave them a commanding 3-1 lead in the Stanley Cup Final over the Vegas Golden Knights.
Evgeny Kuznetsov couldn't help but hear the echoing chants from the crowd: "We want the Cup!"
"We feel their energy. I don't want to lie," he said. "Sometimes you feel when people cheering against you, you feel the energy too. In this playoff, we're not very good at home, but in this series, we keep the crowd happy. That's big thing for us."
The series seems like it's in their grasp ... or is it?
Here's a look at why the Capitals have got this and some reasons the Stanley Cup might still be a possibility for the expansion darlings from Sin City.
The Capitals have this because ... taking a 3-1 lead in Game 4 of the Stanley Cup Final is pretty much winning the Stanley Cup. Teams that have taken a 3-1 series lead in the Final have gone on to win the Cup 31 straight times. Overall, they're 32-1 since best-of-seven series were added to the playoffs in 1939. The only time a team has rallied to win the Cup was in 1942, when the Toronto Maple Leafs roared back to "reverse sweep" the Detroit Red Wings 4-3. Through the first three rounds of the playoffs, teams have trailed a best-of-seven series by 3-1 300 times in NHL history. Only 28 of them have come back to win. Best of luck, Knights.
The Golden Knights have a chance because ... history is not on Vegas' side here. Forgive me if you've heard that before. Need I remind you that this is a team that opened with 500-1 odds to win the Stanley Cup? That every member of this self-proclaimed band of misfits felt slighted at some point in the past year, then 15 went on to have career years, pointswise? As David Perron reminded us this week, nearly everyone counted the Golden Knights out after they were outclassed by Winnipeg in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals. Vegas went on to win four straight games to clinch it. It feels fitting for them to have to overcome an even greater deficit to claim the grand prize.
"It's the Final," Pierre-Edouard Bellemare said. "Nothing easy is good."
From the first round all the way through the Stanley Cup Final, ESPN has you covered. Check out the full picture and coverage on each team.
The Capitals are two games away from hoisting the Cup, and Ovi is a big reason why. Is it all on him, or have we just been missing his greatness?
The Caps' quest for the Stanley Cup has been a welcome distraction for Amanda Wilson, who has been undergoing treatment for a rare form of cancer.
The Capitals have this because ... their team defense is machine-like, their goaltender is saving everything, and the stuff he isn't saving is bouncing off his posts. Washington owns so much of the neutral zone that it might start asking Vegas to pay rent to use it. The Caps have taken away the front of the net: 10 of the Golden Knights' past 19 goals were scored on the doorstep of the goaltender, yet they've scored none in that manner since Game 1 of the Final.
"As a group, this is the most committed group that I've been with," defenseman Matt Niskanen said. "I don't think it's the most talented team I've been on. But it's the most committed to the dirty, unheralded plays."
Holtby now has a .919 save percentage in the series and .945 in the Caps' three wins. Again: When James Neal is staring at that much net for that long and can only put it off the post in Game 4, it's clear that Holtby either has a force field up or can subtly manipulate iron like Magneto.
The Golden Knights have a chance because ... believe it or not, they didn't play that badly in Game 4. Rather, they had chances that just didn't go in. Through two periods, Vegas held a 10-2 high-danger chance advantage at even strength. And let's not forget the posts, Braden Holtby's best friends. Had Neal's wide-open look in the first period gone in, we're talking about a totally different game -- and series. Over the past two games, the Golden Knights have hit a whopping seven posts. Vegas was buoyed by its top line all season that, yes, posted an incredibly high shooting percentage. In the Final, the combo of Jonathan Marchessault, William Karlsson and Reilly Smith has combined to shoot 9.1 percent. Was this inevitable regression? That's the lens of a pessimist. It could mean they're overdue for some major puck luck in the games ahead.
The Capitals have this because ... it's clear they, not the Golden Knights, are the team of destiny. They eliminated Columbus and coach John Tortorella, who tormented them with the Rangers, in the first round. They eliminated their archrivals the Pittsburgh Penguins, for only the second time in franchise history, in the second round. They eliminated a bunch of former Rangers and a former Penguin in Chris Kunitz and won a rare Game 7 in ousting Tampa Bay. They had only two big bosses remaining: the team their former GM George McPhee built, featuring former Penguins goalie Marc-Andre Fleury. They're in the process of bludgeoning both.
"We're trying to write our own story here," Capitals forward T.J. Oshie said. "We don't dwell much on the past. There's been heartbreak here. We know that. But that's kind of scarred over and made us stronger for it."
The Golden Knights have a chance because ... it hasn't even been three months since 16th-seeded UMBC shocked Virginia; if you don't believe in sports miracles, you sure have a short memory. Look, the hockey gods tend to reward those who work the hardest and grind the longest. Alex Ovechkin & Co. certainly fit the mold. But so do many members of these Golden Knights. No, they haven't been together as a unit very long, but that doesn't make any of them any less deserving.
OK, so we've covered why the Capitals and Golden Knights have this. But what if they don't?
The Capitals might not have this because ... what if this entire run, this whole magical journey on which Ovechkin seems destined to hoist the Stanley Cup, the Capitals seem destined to finally raise the ultimate banner and the District of Columbia seems poised to celebrate its first pro sports championship since 1992 ... what if this ends up being the ultimate answer to the question that has sent Capitals fans into the fetal position for three decades: "How will they blow it this time?"
The Golden Knights might be finished because ... Fleury is no longer playing out of his mind. Tomas Tatar wasn't the offensive spark in Game 4, and any lineup changes for Gerard Gallant from here would just be desperation (really, you think inserting Oscar Lindberg could be the answer? Yeah, don't answer that). The team of high shooting percentage and overachieving darlings finally fell to earth. Yes, it came later than any of us could have expected. Indeed, it was a magical ride. Let's cherish it for what it was.

Amanda Kessel is returning to the NWHL.
Fresh off helping Team USA win its first women's hockey gold medal in 20 years, Kessel has signed a one-year contract to join the Metropolitan Riveters for the 2018-19 season, she told ESPN.
Since returning from Pyeongchang (after defeating rival Canada in a 3-2 shootout win), Kessel went on a whirlwind media tour with teammates. She took some time off from training to contemplate her future, but when the Riveters coach called to gauge her interest, Kessel says she knew returning to the NWHL was the right thing for her both developmentally -- to continue training for the women's national team -- as well as for the growth of the sport.
"It felt like for two months we were celebrities," said Kessel, 26. "We were on "The Ellen (DeGeneres) Show," we met so many famous people, so many people reached out to us. For whatever reason, maybe it's just winning gold rather than silver or because of the way the game was won, it felt different this time. It felt like a really big moment for women's hockey and we need to keep that momentum going."
Kessel, a three-time national champion and the 2013 winner of the Patty Kazmaier Memorial Award at the University of Minnesota, led the NWHL in apparel sales in 2016-17 and was also the league's highest-paid player earning $26,000 a season. Details of the forward's new contract are undisclosed. Kessel tallied 18 points (four goals, 14 assists) in just eight games in her first season for the Riveters. She did not play in the 2017-18 season as she trained with the national team. The Riveters are the defending Isobel Cup champions.
"It's definitely not about the money," Kessel says. "I could have taken a desk job or gotten into coaching or did something else. But this is the right choice for me in my playing career and also to help grow the game."
Kessel notes that growing up, there was no professional league in America for women's hockey, so playing in the NWHL allows her to "be a role model for young girls" to prove they can have a future in the sport. Kessel has also been working on her own clothing line with the hockey lifestyle brand, Gongshow. The AK28 line is set to launch late summer or early fall.
In 2017, the New Jersey Devils announced a strategic partnership with the Riveters, becoming the first NHL club to invest in a NWHL franchise. The partnership includes providing rent-free facilities for the Riveters games and practices in Newark, as well as assistance in marketing, sponsorships and ticket sales. In December, the Pegula Sports and Entertainment Group bought the Buffalo Beauts, making Kim and Terry Pegula the first independent owners of a team in the league. The Pegulas also own the Buffalo Sabres and Buffalo Bills.
Commissioner Dani Rylan called the Pegulas' purchase "a landmark moment for the NWHL, our players and fans, and women's hockey." Last month, the NWHL announced its first expansion team, the Minnesota Whitecaps, which brings the league total to five teams.
Still, the three-year-old league is still finding footing. Though it was the first women's professional hockey league to pay its players, they do not earn livable wages (Kessel estimated that in her first year with the Riveters "probably 99 percent" of the roster also had a full- or part-time job). Salaries in the league have decreased from around $10,000-$25,000 in the first season to $5,000-$7,000 last season. With the addition of the Midwest-based Whitecaps, the league now has to consider air travel, a considerable cost.
Kessel is one of many players who have called for the NWHL and CWHL to merge; advocates believe that pooling resources between the dueling leagues will help enhance the overall visibility and provide a more stable base. The Canadian-based CWHL was founded in 2007, and recently added two franchises in China. That league now have seven teams.
"I'd like to sit down with our commissioner and talk, as well as their commissioner and talk," Kessel says. "I'll reach out to some players in their league. I'd love to see us make progress there, maybe we can start with an exhibition game. Just something to get the conversation going. I really believe there should be one league, it's better for the sport."
Kessel has a history with concussions, and had to sit out an entire season at Minnesota after recovering from one. "I feel really great," she says. "I've had no issues with that recently."
The 2018-19 NWHL season begins in the fall.

WASHINGTON -- Alex Ovechkin is like a living emoji for the Stanley Cup Final. One look at him and you can immediately tell the emotional comportment of the Capitals or the state of the game.
Like, for example, his delirious leaping celebration when the Capitals made it 2-0 en route to their 3-1 win over the Vegas Golden Knights at home Saturday night in Game 3 to take a 2-1 series lead.
"He's on another level," said Capitals defenseman John Carlson. "Everyone kind of reacts to stuff differently, and he's always been that brash celebrator. It's great to see, and he's as engaged as anyone could ever be, I think. It shows in his game, and it shows in the effect that it has on the rest of us."
Coach Barry Trotz said Ovechkin set the tone over the past few games for Washington, including Game 3, during which he scored the first goal for the Capitals.
"He's very passionate, as everyone knows. It was the right thing that in our first playoff game at home in the Final that Alex would score the first goal," Trotz said.
Here are five other things we learned from Game 3 of the Stanley Cup Final.
The injury suffered by Evgeny Kuznetsov that knocked him out of Game 2 of the Stanley Cup Final might have been greatly overstated, or at least overspeculated. Trotz downplayed the severity of whatever ailed the center after taking a Brayden McNabb check in the first period and leaving the game. Kuznetsov said he felt fine by Saturday morning.
With two more coaches hired from the ranks of college hockey this spring, who will be next? And what should we expect from the Stars and Rangers?
The Caps' quest for the Stanley Cup has been a welcome distraction for Amanda Wilson, who has been undergoing treatment for a rare form of cancer.
First responder Joseph Bruno reflects on the Golden Knights' symbiotic relationship with the citizens of Las Vegas following October's tragedy.
"I felt like I could help the team. It seemed to work out pretty well for us," he said.
Boy, did it. He assisted on Ovechkin's second-period goal in Game 3, then scored the eventual game winner on an odd-man break with Jay Beagle at 12:50 of the second.
"That shot is not my strong side," Kuznetsov said with a laugh after Saturday's victory. "But in that situation, we got a 2-on-1. I look for the Beegs ... when you have a chance to feed those guys, the ones that play the PK a lot and block a lot of shots, you want to make that pass for him, but he wasn't open that time. And you have to shoot."
It was Beagle who passed to Kuznetsov to start the play. When you give the playoffs' leading scorer the puck, is it as good as a goal?
"It's not as good as a goal, but I want it out of my hands when it's me and him, that's for sure," Beagle said with a laugh.
Beagle later assisted on Devante Smith-Pelly's clinching goal after a misplay by Vegas defenseman Shea Theodore.
But it was Kuznetsov who was the Capitals' offensive star in Game 3.
"He's been great all season, for the last couple seasons, really," Carlson said. "One of the most dynamic players and can take over the league if he wants to, and I think he's that talented and sees the game better than anyone else."
The play of Theodore was certainly problematic. This, of course, comes with the caveat that the 22-year-old had a terrific season for the Golden Knights, and he has been mostly strong these playoffs. But he wasn't too sharp in Games 2 and 3; the former Anaheim Duck was involved in a series of blunders.
From a broken stick in Game 3 that led to the Kuznetsov goal -- "That's one I'd like to have back," Theodore said -- to a whiffed clearing attempt that led to a turnover and directly set up Smith-Pelly's tally, Theodore said: "I just have to be much better than I was." And we agree.
It appeared Vegas coach Gerard Gallant skipped Theodore's next shift after the Smith-Pelly goal.
When asked if he received an explanation, Theodore said: "Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure."
Kudos to Theodore for facing the media after a troubling night.
Here's what his defensive partner, Deryk Engelland, said he'll tell the youngster: "Turn the page. It's not a big deal. It's one game, and we need him at his best tomorrow. Next game."
Braden Holtby misplayed the puck. Tomas Nosek scored into a gaping net. The lead was cut to 2-1 early in the third period.
This was the kind of deflating "uh-oh" moment that in previous postseasons would have drilled under the skin of the Capitals and spread through them like a toxin of doubt. The kind of play that would have rendered the arena silent, followed by palpable tension.
But the Capitals have been saying for weeks that this group is different. Their response to that potential momentum swing was another indication.
"We've been in a lot of moments in the last 10 years. Not as many good ones as we'd like. I think everybody recognizes that if you do the right things and keep pounding the rock, there's a lot of pride in this dressing room, and there's a lot of pride in this D.C. area," Trotz said. "In the past failures, you would feel a lot of anxiety, even before we started the playoffs. But I think we've gotten past that as a group. We gotten past that, hopefully, as a community."
Capitals defenseman Michal Kempny suffered one of the worst injuries of the game ... before the game.
Kempny fell violently into the boards face-first during warm-ups, and he quickly left the ice for the dressing room. When he came out to play, he had a stitched-over gash on his nose.
"I stepped on the puck during warm-ups and smashed my face against the boards," he said.
Undaunted, Kempny played 17:23 in Game 3 and had three blocked shots.
The Golden Knights got to this point because on most nights of these playoffs, they were the faster team. In the first three rounds, they also wreaked havoc on the forecheck.
Vegas looked far more lackadaisical in Game 3. By the halfway point of the game, Vegas had mustered only nine shots. They seemed stifled by the Capitals' presence in the neutral zone. Washington continues to outclass Vegas in terms of blocking shots, with a whopping 26 in Game 3, after recording 18 each in the first two games of the series. (The Golden Knights blocked nine shots in Game 3, eight in Game 2 and 17 in Game 1.)
So where is the sense of urgency from Vegas?
"All year, we've had a lot of guys going," Engelland said. "That hasn't been the case [in Games 2 and 3]."
And why is that particularly troubling?
Engelland's take: "We had twice as much time off as they have in the playoffs. We should have a lot in the tank."

ARLINGTON, Va. -- Evgeny Kuznetsov was on the ice for Washington Capitals practice Friday, 36 hours after leaving Game 2 of the Stanley Cup Final against the Vegas Golden Knights clutching his left arm in pain.
Coach Barry Trotz said Kuznetsov had not been cleared, considers him day to day, and expects Washington's leading scorer to be a game-time decision on Saturday.
Evgeny Kuznetsov is skating at Caps optional practice. Doesn't appear to be limited.
Defenseman Brooks Orpik, who took a slash to the hand late in Game 2, did not participate in the optional practice, along with Alex Ovechkin, T.J. Oshie and others. Trotz says Orpik is fine.
Goaltender Braden Holtby, who stopped 37 of 39 shots in Game 2 to even the series, was on the ice as part of his regular routine. Holtby has continued his career-long playoff success this spring, going 13-7 with a 2.19 goals-against average and .921 save percentage.
Over his NHL career, Holtby has a 2.04 GAA and .929 save percentage in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Information from The Associated Press contributed to this report.

The bounces went Vegas' way in Game 1 of the Stanley Cup Final. But if you believe in higher hockey powers -- and most coaches and players do -- things were bound to even out. When Braden Holtby sprawled to make an improbable stick save on Alex Tuch with two minutes remaining in the third period of Game 2, Washington coach Barry Trotz knew exactly who to thank.
"To me, it was the hockey gods," Trotz said. "They evened it up from last game. Once he made that save, I knew we were going to win the game."
The Capitals indeed preserved a 3-2 win to even this series. But there was plenty of interesting hockey outside of The Save. Here are our five takeaways from Game 2, as the series shifts back to Washington.
After gushing about Marc-Andre Fleury's spectacular play through the first three rounds, raise your hand if you expected him to surrender seven goals in the first two games. Heck, did you think these two teams would combine for 15 goals as the series shifted to Washington?
It was Holtby stealing the show in Game 2 with that save on Tuch. Fleury was scrambling for answers after posting a .885 save percentage in Game 2; he looked a bit more like the inconsistent goalie during his last few years in Pittsburgh than the one who sparkled for Vegas all season long.
Trotz didn't give a status update on Evgeny Kuznetsov's injured left arm. Alex Ovechkin said, "I'm pretty sure he's going to be fine." Other players spoke about how significant his loss is, and how they'll step up to fill that void.
First responder Joseph Bruno reflects on the Golden Knights' symbiotic relationship with the citizens of Las Vegas following October's tragedy.
The Capitals were without their top center for most of Game 2 -- and won. Here's how they can keep winning if he misses more time.
The Capitals' Game 2 win was due in no small part to Holtby's stick save on Alex Tuch. Amid the chaos, here's how he did it.
If all of this sounds familiar, it's because it's pretty much what was said and done after center Nicklas Backstrom injured his hand in Game 5 of the Caps' second-round series against the Pittsburgh Penguins. As the Capitals face life without their leading scorer, who left for the trainers' room with 5:18 remaining in the first period, the common theme in the dressing room was one of resiliency. Kuznetsov leads the playoffs with 25 points in 21 games.
"It's a tough break there, but I felt like we came together really as a team. We tried to play better than we did the first 10 minutes. So the second half of the first there and the second period I thought we played pretty good. We kept it simple," said Backstrom. "It's all about commitment, too. We blocked shots and we played for each other."
Trotz believes the injury could be a key moment in the series.
"That really galvanized us," he said. "You get an all-in mentality. I know how resilient this group has been all year. I think that might be a turning point for us."
The Golden Knights had 69 shot attempts in Game 2, but only 17 scoring chances. Of those 17, only seven were considered high-danger chances.
"I think our guys did a pretty good job of executing their plays, we just didn't score on a couple of chances," said defenseman Nate Schmidt. "Going into the next game, I think our guys are gonna be more loose, which I think is good. And when we play a little bit more relaxed, I think we're good."
That said, what's the definition of insanity, and is it "trying to skate through the Capitals' defense stacked along the blue line rather than playing dump-and-chase hockey"? Because if that's the definition, the Knights had a clinical case in Game 2. There's confidence in your offense, but there's also a case to be made for making adjustments.
Schmidt says there's no need to panic.
"I think it's really important that we take a step back and take a deep breath, know that you're not going to win this series in two games," he said. "You're not going to lose the series in two games. Know that we have a confident group in here, a group that can go out and make plays and we're a special group. We can go out and win games on the road. We've done it all playoffs. Should be nothing different moving on."
Ovechkin scored his first goal in a Stanley Cup Final, which felt more like an inevitability -- especially how it was scored. On a second-period power play, Ovechkin was left alone in the Ovechkin sweet spot. Easy money.
The Golden Knights had plenty of power plays (five) including a lengthy (and fruitless) 5-on-3 in the third period, but the sizzle just wasn't there.
"Yeah, you don't get a whole lot of chances to have 5-on-3s, especially in the Stanley Cup Final," Schmidt said. "If you're not going to score, which hey, you're not going out there expecting it, but at the same time you've got to at least generate some momentum."
The last time Orpik scored a goal, the first "Deadpool" movie was atop the box office. It was Feb. 26, 2016. But in Game 2, the Capitals defenseman scored the game-winning goal against Vegas -- and yes, "Deadpool 2" is now in theaters.
Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
He had gone 220 games, including the playoffs, without a goal. At 37 years and 246 days, Orpik became the oldest defenseman to score in the Stanley Cup Final since Nicklas Lidstrom did so at 38 years, 33 days for the Red Wings in Game 4 of the 2008 Final.
"I haven't yelled that loud for someone to score a goal since Ovi scored one of his milestones," said winger T.J. Oshie. "Brooksie's one of those guys. He's old-school. You only get a handful of them, I think, that you play with throughout your career. He's one of those guys. So to see him get rewarded with a goal at a big time. It makes me feel good, and I imagine he feels great."
Orpik is a player his teammates root for because so many others malign him. Trotz mentioned the analytics aren't strong on Orpik, but they don't account for his effort and what he means to the team.
Defenseman Matt Niskanen, a teammate of Orpik's in Washington and Pittsburgh, was more direct.
"What was our Corsi tonight? And did it have any effect on the game? I've hated that stat when mine is good. I've hated it when mine is bad. Whatever," he said. "[Orpik] takes a beating on that. I don't think anybody in here gives a crap."

LAS VEGAS -- Washington Capitals winger Tom Wilson defended his controversial hit on Vegas Golden Knights winger Jonathan Marchessault in the third period of Game 1 of the Stanley Cup Final, saying it was "a good clean hit" in "playoff hockey."
Marchessault, as well as Vegas teammates, took offense to the play.
With the score tied 4-4, Wilson laid out Marchessault at open ice, which stirred the Vegas bench. The referees huddled but decided not to issue a major penalty, instead giving Wilson two minutes for interference. Vegas winger David Perron was also given a two-minute minor for offsetting penalties.
Vegas won 6-4 to take a 1-0 series lead.
Capitals forward Tom Wilson will not be suspended for his controversial hit on Golden Knights winger Jonathan Marchessault in the third period of Game 1 of the Stanley Cup Final.
Do you buy Alex Ovechkin's "nerves" argument from Game 1? Who needs to step up in Game 2? We hit the big topics here.
Our NHL experts -- including Barry Melrose, John Buccigross, Linda Cohn, Steve Levy, Emily Kaplan, Greg Wyshynski and Adnan Virk -- forecast who will win the Cup and MVP honors.
"I saw the hit. I remember everything," said Marchessault, who went through the concussion protocol but returned to finish the game. "It was a late hit. I don't really need to talk more about it. I think the league will take care of it. We know what type of player he is out there. You gotta keep your head up and try to make the play. I didn't make the play. I was a little late, but whatever."
Vegas coach Gerard Gallant said the coaching staff was "upset about it. It was a big hit." Gallant called Wilson an "old-school player" but said, "For me, it was a late hit."
Golden Knights fourth-liner Ryan Reaves added: "It was a late blindside hit like Wilson always does."
Afterward, Wilson saw no problem with the play.
"There are going to be hits," Wilson said. "It's a contact sport. That's all that I saw."
Marchessault described the play from his point of view: "I have the puck, I'm trying to make the play, I see [Reilly Smith and William Karlsson] going through, a couple seconds go by, and I just get blindsided. I'm not a guy that makes those decisions, but I'm sure the league is going to take care of it."
Wilson's take: "He'd probably say he shouldn't admire his pass. I'm just finishing my check. I haven't slowed it down. I've been told that we're talking tenths [of a second] here. I think it's game speed, and I delivered it in good time. I think he let up a little bit because he wasn't aware I was there. I finished him through his body. He might have been a little bit surprised by it, but it wasn't an aggressive hit. He looked fine at the end when he was yelling at me from the bench."
Wilson was suspended for three games in Washington's second-round series against the Pittsburgh Penguins for a hit that broke the jaw of Penguins forward Zach Aston-Reese. Wilson is already considered a repeat offender; he was forced to sit out two preseason games following a late hit on St. Louis Blues rookie Robert Thomas and was suspended for the first four games of the regular season after boarding Blues forward Sammy Blais.
"You always have your reputation," Wilson said. "When you play my physical style, you're going to have that reputation. I trust myself. I play the game hard. It's my job to bring that energy, that physicality. Right after he got up, he said 'good hit.' It's the Stanley Cup Final out there. There are going to be hits. It looked good to me."

Forty-nine players have appeared in a playoff game for the Washington Capitals or the Vegas Golden Knights en route to the Stanley Cup Final. Some of them have contributed mightily. Some of them have had their moments. One of them is from Australia.
Here's a ranking of every player who has seen action for the NHL's final two teams (and one who may make an appearance in the Final).
We weighed regular-season and postseason accomplishments in devising these rankings, both in terms of stats and other areas of impact on their teams.
After a 49-goal season, Ovechkin has been the most impactful forward in the playoffs, with 12 goals and 10 assists, having had a hand in game-winning moments in each round. "Beast Mode" would be an understatement.
He's the clubhouse leader for the Conn Smythe after flexing ridiculous stats throughout the playoffs, including a .947 save percentage and 1.68 goals-against average. This is a seasoned goaltender playing at the top of his game.
Forever the young Russian Robin to Ovechkin's Batman, Kuznetsov has followed his 83-point season with a playoffs-best 24 points.
He was a 30-goal scorer with the Florida Panthers last season and seemed to raise his game to a new level on the Knights' top line. Despite his goal total dipping to 27, he nearly doubled his assists from 21 to 48 in the regular season.
Which team has the superior first line? The better power play? Who has been blessed by the hockey gods? We debate eight categories and make picks.
The Capitals finally got over the hump. Vegas defied all expectations. Who will hoist the Stanley Cup? Here are the keys, plus a series pick.
Either the Golden Knights or the Capitals will lose in the Final, joining this list of also-rans. Plus, a Calgary Flames Jersey Foul, and more.
Mr. Everything for the Capitals' defense -- he's skating about 26 minutes per game -- has 16 points in 19 games. Didn't get the Norris Trophy nomination, but will get paid this summer.
Sure, you know him as the guy who leaped from six goals in 2016-17 to 43 goals this season. But Wild Bill's best attribute might be his defensive game. He'll likely finish in the top five in Selke Trophy voting.
After a rough regular season that cost him the first two starts of the playoffs, Holtby has a .935 even-strength save percentage in the playoffs. Against the Lightning, he did what Capitals fans have waited for him to do for years: win a series on his own, with back-to-back elimination-game shutouts.
Consistent, defensively sound and offensively gifted. He recovered from the hand injury he suffered in the second round, and he has 16 points in 15 playoff games.
For a team that doesn't have any defensemen who profile as a true No. 1, Schmidt leads the Golden Knights in ice time (24:53 per game in the playoffs) and has elevated his play to a shutdown level this postseason.
He's been the "Real Deal" since he broke into the league a decade ago with the Dallas Stars. Neal is as steady as they come; he has scored at least 21 goals in each of his 10 NHL seasons, despite playing a full 82 games just once.
Some side-eyed Oshie's eight-year contract with the Capitals last summer, but the winger plays a valuable role on their second line and in the slot on their potent power play.
Smith's chemistry with top linemates Karlsson and Marchessault is hard to replicate. Smith, a 26-year-old already on his fourth team, finally has found his groove. He has 14 helpers in 15 games this postseason.
He played in all 82 games for the Golden Knights, and he got active on offense: a healthy 10 goals and 31 assists, tops among Vegas defenseman. Exceeded expectations.
He had 31 points in the regular season but has leveled up in the playoffs on both ends of the ice.
The former Anaheim Duck came with high expectations, and he's right on track to fulfill them. He logged decent minutes -- his 20:21 per game in the regular season was second among Golden Knights skaters.
The Finn shows decent promise as a two-way center. The 27-year-old definitely has wheels, too. He probably projects as a bottom-six forward, but he has raised his game when playing around better players, like Neal.
He had 29 points in the regular season, skating 22:36 per game, but he gets a little downgrade here for a rougher ride in the playoffs.
An impending unrestricted free agent, Perron is a player the Golden Knights likely expected to deal away at the trade deadline. He has battled consistency issues on his four other teams, but he put up a career-high 50 assists and 66 points at the right time.
He had a career year offensively for the Capitals, and he provided some valuable work on the team's second line in the playoffs after Backstrom's injury.
The 27-year-old came along quite nicely for the Golden Knights this season. He doesn't put up offensive numbers, but he's been solid in Vegas' own end and can plug in on the top pairing.
Despite his reputation, and recent jaw-shattering suspension, Wilson functions well on the Capitals' top line, with 12 points in 16 playoff games.
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan have returned home after a wild road to the Cup Final. They rehash Game 7 of Caps-Lightning and discuss how both Washington and the Golden Knights advanced this far. Plus, a full preview of the Final, followed by interviews with new Wild GM Paul Fenton and new Stars coach Jim Montgomery, as well as your favorite segments of the week! Listen »
He's a big man on the wing (6-foot-4, 222 pounds) who loves to throw his body around, but he also has scoring prowess. A 2014 first-round pick and star at Boston College, the 21-year-old has a ton of potential.
The journeyman over-delivered in a big way. A steady presence in the top four, Engelland also provided intangible leadership as the team's sole Vegas resident prior to this season.
The joke's on you: The maligned Orpik was a minus-9 in the regular season and is a plus-15 to (checks notes) lead all players this postseason.
He didn't have a great regular season (35 points) and was injured for much of the playoffs. But c'mon: two goals in a Game 7 for the Capitals. There's an argument for his being much higher on this list.
He had a career offensive year (15 goals) and has four more in the postseason.
Known predominantly for his defensive game, Eakin was left exposed by Dallas because of its center depth. Eakin raised his game on the penalty kill when Reilly Smith missed time in March.
The Capitals' backup goalie had a killer run to end the season, to the point where he was given starts in their first two playoff games. But it's Holtby's crease now.
The speedy forward had 13 goals in the regular season and one outstanding playoff game against the Penguins. He's a plus-5 at even strength.
Terrific on the penalty kill, he's been one of the team's most pleasant surprises (really, there were few expectations when the Czech was plucked from the Detroit Red Wings).
Does a lot of heavy lifting on the Capitals' fourth line. Brings a lightness to the team off the ice as one of its more personable players.
Low-key great pickup for the Capitals in a trade with the Blackhawks, he has played well with Carlson (minus a couple of miscues).
A physical force who has contributed four goals to this playoff run, including the game winner in the Capitals' clinching game against the Blue Jackets.
The Sharks protected Carpenter in the expansion draft, then pivoted and waived the 27-year-old in December. Vegas had scouted him last year and swooped in. He's a hard-working winger who can add a spark on the third or fourth line.
When Bellemare signed with the Flyers as a 29-year-old "rookie" in 2014-15, he essentially made the team for his talent on the penalty kill. He's still strong in that department, and he also leads all Vegas forwards with 63 blocked shots at even strength.
A 2012 first-round pick of the Boston Bruins, the younger brother of P.K. unceremoniously ended up on waivers this fall. The Golden Knights gladly swooped in; the rookie has been terrific (.910 save percentage, 2.68 GAA) when healthy.
He's a speedy rookie who had 18 points in 67 games in the regular season and hasn't left the lineup in the playoffs.
After 18 points in the regular season, he has just two in 16 games while being a scratch here and there for the Capitals.
A 2008 first-round pick, Sbisa profiles as a puck-moving, two-way defenseman. He never lived up to expectations in Vancouver, but he has been good in Vegas -- when healthy (he skated in only 30 regular-season games).
The Golden Knights paid a big price for Tatar at the deadline, then seldom used him (he was scratched for seven of Vegas' first 11 playoff games). There's no denying his talent -- it's just whether it will be showcased in Vegas.
The rookie defenseman is Orpik's partner and has one point in 17 playoff games, with a 45.2 Corsi for percentage in the playoffs.
The veteran evolved his game from enforcer -- he has not fought since being acquired by the Golden Knights at the trade deadline -- to just a gritty fourth-line forward. He adds value; just don't expect goals, like his Game 5 winner, too often.
A semi-regular in the Golden Knights' lineup this season -- and especially useful on the power play, with 12 power-play points in 45 games -- he's still waiting for his first playoff action this spring.
He hasn't played a ton (averaging 7:59 minutes per game in nine playoff appearances), and he is battling back from an injury. When he's on, he's a high-energy forward who plays a physical brand of hockey.
The speedy forward has been a bit of a disappointment since being selected from the New York Rangers' crop of exposed players. He tallied just 11 points in 63 regular-season games.
He had four points in 11 games during the regular season and has appeared in two playoff games.
Aussie, Aussie, Aussie! Oi! Oi! Oi! His first playoff game was Game 6 against the Penguins, and he set up a critical goal with his hustle.
The rookie appeared in two playoff games against the Penguins after playing three games in the regular season.
He played eight games in the regular season and averaged 8:50 per game. He played 12:12 in Game 6 against the Penguins, registering one shot on goal.
The former New Jersey Devil played only 34 regular-season games for the Knights and hasn't seen playoff action since the Sharks series. There are some things to like in his game, but he seems to be relegated back to the land of the healthy scratches.

Greg Wyshynski: So which occurrence is the greater harbinger of the apocalypse: Alex Ovechkin and the Washington Capitals winning the Stanley Cup, or an expansion team winning the Stanley Cup?
Emily Kaplan: The Capitals exorcising their demons feels cathartic to me. We always knew Ovi & Co. had the talent -- it really was just a matter of time. The Golden Knights, on the other hand, had 500-1 odds. Even their own management didn't think they could win like this for another few years.
Wyshynski: All right, let's get to the previewing, as we break down the Stanley Cup Final between the [checks notes] Washington Capitals and the [rechecks notes] Vegas Golden Knights [checks into an asylum].
Wyshynski: The Golden Knights' top three scorers, and their only scorers in double digits, are all found on their top line: Jonathan Marchessault (eight goals, 10 assists), Reilly Smith (two goals, 14 assists) and William Karlsson (six goals, seven assists), the latter being the only member of the line who wasn't gift-wrapped by Panthers GM Dale Tallon. The Capitals' top two scorers are on their top line: Evgeny Kuznetsov (11 goals, 13 assists) and Alex Ovechkin (12 goals, 10 assists). Tom Wilson, whom you might remember from a fight in Game 7, brings physicality and some offense (three goals, eight assists).
No Washington big four team has won a title since 1991. With the hockey gods seemingly on their side, can the Capitals end the streak of futility?
Does Vegas' Stanley Cup run make it the most unlikely finalist in modern American sports? Bill Barnwell looks at candidates across the big four.
No one expected Vegas to make the Stanley Cup Final this season. Here's how each player taken in the expansion draft has helped (or not).
Kaplan: The Golden Knights' top line paced this offense for so much of the season (92 goals among the three), but let's not forget Vegas has defensive prowess, too. We should celebrate its success. But I have a hard time picking against a line featuring Alex Ovechkin -- whose 13 straight seasons of pregame chicken, cream sauce and pasta dinners have been carb-loading him for this one epic playoff run. Oh, and Kuznetsov has been spectacular.
Wyshynski: Oh, I have zero problem picking against that line, because the Golden Knights' top trio makes more magic than David Copperfield and Criss Angel having a wizard battle. (Sorry ... "illusionist" battle.) No one has been able to slow it yet, and I think it'll continue to be the pulsating heart of the Vegas offense.
Advantage: Even
Kaplan: The Capitals flex scoring talent on their second line -- Backstrom is above a point-per-game pace, followed by T.J. Oshie (six goals, seven assists). James Neal has nine points in 15 games for Vegas; Erik Haula and David Perron have only seven points apiece. The bottom six for both teams are interchangeable, though Vegas boasts a six-goal scorer in these playoffs in third-liner Alex Tuch, as well as some strong defensive specialists, such as penalty-killing studs Pierre-Edouard Bellemare and Tomas Nosek.
Wyshynski: I'll give the nod to the Capitals here. Nicklas Backstrom has gotten better in every game, allowing the Caps to move Lars Eller back to the third line. If Andre Burakovsky is going to start contributing as he did in Game 7, that tips the scales even more. While I acknowledge the Knights have used their forward depth to skate three opponents into the ground, I think the Capitals can match their pace.
Kaplan: One thing I loved about the Golden Knights all season was that Gerard Gallant could roll four lines, with little regard to matchups. Yes, Gallant relies a little extra on his first line (especially Karlsson, who plays, and excels, in all situations), but you really need four lines to match up against Vegas. I'm not terribly impressed with Washington's fourth line, though it seems to keep having big moments. I think Greg is right in that this comes down to the talent sprinkled on Washington's second and third lines, which are superior to Vegas' corresponding lines.
Advantage: Capitals
Wyshynski: John Carlson is, as the kids say, "gonna get paid." The Capitals' leader in ice time (25:59 per game) has 16 points in 19 games, with 10 of them on the power play. He's paired with Michal Kempny. Dmitry Orlov has been a puck-moving revelation for Washington, but partner Matt Niskanen has been inconsistent. Veteran Brooks Orpik, a physical presence against Tampa, is on the third pairing with Christian Djoos. The Knights' ice-time leader is an old friend of the Caps: Nate Schmidt, whom they lost in the expansion draft. He's typically paired with Brayden McNabb. Deryk Engelland and Shea Theodore (seven points) form a solid duo. Colin Miller and Luca Sbisa worked together in the conference finals.
Kaplan: Ah, the age-old debate about quantity versus quality. The Golden Knights' shtick all season is that they don't have one defenseman who profiles as a shutdown No. 1, but they have plenty of men who are capable. Meanwhile, the Caps certainly have the best top-end talent in Carlson (and a solid second pairing) but drop off after that. As much as we champion depth in the playoffs, I don't see Washington's bottom guys as such a liability that I can't pick their group.
Wyshynski: The Capitals' defensive effort in the past two series has been a result of a total-team effort and some outstanding goaltending. Which is a polite way of saying I think their blue line can be taken advantage of if the Knights get their cycle going. Meanwhile, I've admired all season how quickly the Vegas blue line plays. Not that they're all burners like Schmidt, but that they move the puck smartly and rapidly. They get my pick.
Advantage: Even
Kaplan: What more is there to say about Marc-Andre Fleury this postseason? His otherworldly stats -- .947 save percentage, 1.68 goals-against average -- have stolen a few games. Rested after playing only 46 games this regular season, Fleury is in the Stanley Cup Final for the third straight season and fifth time overall. Meanwhile, Braden Holtby shook off an early goalie controversy (or was that just coach Barry Trotz trying to light a fire under his starter?) to post solid numbers: .924 save percentage, 2.04 GAA. The 2016 Vezina Trophy winner enters the Final after two straight shutouts.
Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
Wyshynski: The fact that the Final Boss -- in gaming parlance -- for the Capitals is Fleury, who had a hand in two of the Penguins' three series wins over Ovechkin's Capitals, is just delicious. And let's face it: Even with Braden Holtby having the postseason of his life -- those two shutouts made him only the fifth goalie in NHL history to blank a foe in Games 6 and 7 -- there's no way I can put him ahead of a goalie with an obscene .947 save percentage like Fleury.
Kaplan: All right, it doesn't look like there's too much of an argument here. Nobody is picking against The Flower.
Advantage: Golden Knights
Wyshynski: The Capitals' power play is second in the playoffs at 28.8 percent on 59 opportunities. The Knights are at 17.6 percent on 51 opportunities. The Vegas penalty kill has been solid at 82.5 percent on 57 times short-handed. The Capitals are at 75.4 percent on 61 times shorthanded, although, in fairness, they faced two of the top three power plays in the NHL in Pittsburgh and Tampa Bay.
Kaplan: I think the most interesting matchup is Washington's lethal power play against the Golden Knights' kill. Vegas should be encouraged that it kept Ovechkin's sweet-spot clone, Patrik Laine (who had three more power-play goals than Ovechkin this season), mostly in check on the man advantage in the Western Conference finals.
Wyshynski: This is as significant an advantage as the Capitals have in this series. Their power play is extremely hard to handle. With Ovechkin looming in his spot, that opens up the slot area for Oshie, who has five power-play goals in the playoffs. And if he doesn't pull the trigger, the Capitals can set up a double screen for Carlson. Their power play is clicking, and their penalty kill has been honing its craft against elite talent for two rounds.
Advantage: Capitals
Kaplan: The Golden Knights are managing an injury to energy forward William Carrier; the bottom-six winger has not played since May 4 during the San Jose series, though he has resumed skating. Backup goaltender Malcolm Subban has also been sidelined, making Maxime Lagace the Golden Knights' No. 2. After welcoming Backstrom back from a four-game absence due to a hand injury, the Capitals are healthy.
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan have returned home after a wild road to the Cup Final. They rehash Game 7 of Caps-Lightning and discuss how both Washington and the Golden Knights advanced this far. Plus, a full preview of the Final, followed by interviews with new Wild GM Paul Fenton and new Stars coach Jim Montgomery, as well as your favorite segments of the week! Listen »
Wyshynski: The Capitals have everybody back and have shown they can handle significant absences, whether it's due to injury (Burakovsky, Backstrom) or being suspended after injuring others (Wilson).
Kaplan: Vegas has fared just fine without Carrier, notably in a series against a bruising team such as the Jets. As long as Fleury stays healthy, the backup situation shouldn't matter for the Knights; Lagace was one of the many goalies who admirably steadied the ship in Fleury's absence this season, though his numbers aren't terrific (.867 save percentage, 3.92 GAA in 16 appearances, four of them starts). All of that said, the Caps have everyone available, so they get the nod.
Advantage: Capitals
Wyshynski: Washington's Barry Trotz coached 1,524 regular-season games and 108 more in the playoffs before getting the opportunity to coach in the Stanley Cup Final. Vegas' Gerard Gallant will likely run away with the Jack Adams award this season after taking a bunch of guys with "Hi, My Name Is" stickers and somehow molding them into a Western Conference champion.
Kaplan: The Golden Knights excelled this season because they could play freely. Guys didn't hold on to their sticks as tight. Video sessions weren't as long. As James Neal told me of his coach during the season, "He doesn't complicate anything." Gallant has stayed true to form these playoffs; sure he has had to play a little line salad, but -- on brand for their season -- everything has worked out swimmingly.
Wyshynski: I've never been a big Trotz fan in the playoffs and thought his decision to sit Holtby at the start of the first round was daft. But he outcoached Mike Sullivan and Jon Cooper in consecutive rounds, to the point where the latter coach was so obsessed with matchups that his best offensive players didn't see enough ice in Game 7. But we all know why he gets the nod here: the hot lap before Game 7, as the 55-year-old coach opened practice with a wind sprint around the rink. They didn't even have to play the game after that, it was so in the bag.
Advantage: Even
Kaplan: The Capitals are the team of manifest destiny; with enough talent and will, it was inevitable they would conquer all of the Eastern Conference and end up here. The Golden Knights? On the surface, they're a team for those of us who crave instant gratification, usually something the hockey gods frown upon (the hockey gods, for example, are never believers in high shooting percentages). That said, the Golden Knights' ascent is a boon for the sport's visibility, and the roster is filled with players who were often overlooked, but persisted to work hard and bide their time to make it here. The hockey gods like that.
Wyshynski: It's a classic conundrum for those of us who believe, wholeheartedly, in the puck supernatural. Have the hockey gods, through odd bounces and good fortune, decided that the torture is over for the Capitals and Ovechkin? Or are the hockey gods mischievous, using the Golden Knights as an enduring lesson about the folly of player-personnel decisions? After deep thought and prayers, I feel it's both. However, the lesson has already been learned, so the Capitals have the hockey gods' favor. Why else would this journey end with a series against George McPhee and Marc-Andre Fleury?
Advantage: Capitals
Wyshynski: Capitals in six.
Kaplan: Golden Knights in seven.

On the eve of the NHL expansion draft in June, Vegas Golden Knights GM George McPhee was in his last conversations with his peers. These weren't comfortable conversations: The draft rules favored the Knights in a way they had never favored another NHL expansion team, forcing many of the other 30 clubs to surrender players they didn't want to lose or grease the palms of McPhee with players or picks to ensure they didn't lose them.
"We have lots of defensemen lined up, we have lots of centers, and we have scoring on the wings, a little more scoring than we anticipated. And the goaltending looks solid," McPhee said, contemplating the list for a moment. "It's what we're trying to accomplish: To have a competitive club that people are going to enjoy watching play and then have the draft picks to draft our way to being a championship team."
Does Vegas' Stanley Cup run make it the most unlikely finalist in modern American sports? Bill Barnwell looks at candidates across the big four.
There was a time when the veteran wondered if the NHL wanted him anymore. After his goal against the Jets, his stick is headed to the Hall of Fame.
Only one NHL team gets to raise the Stanley Cup in June. The rest will be working hard this summer to get there at the end of next season.
As it turns out, the Knights did draft their way to being a championship team -- through the expansion draft, rather than during what owner Bill Foley believed would be a five-year build to a Stanley Cup Final. Although no one around the Knights predicted this unprecedented success for a first-year team -- not only in hockey but in all of sports -- McPhee acknowledged a few days after the expansion draft that the Knights had some good pieces.
"We like our team right now. We've got speed up the middle, scoring on the wing, veterans and young guys on defense. We're in a good place," he said. "This could not have gone better, in my mind." The press didn't listen to McPhee. Some headlines:
The Hockey News: "How good will the Golden Knights be? Not very."
Deadspin: "Wow The Golden Knights Are Going To Be Bad."
Newsweek: "Vegas Golden Knights Are Going To Suck in 2017-18 And Here's Why."
Perhaps most damning: The sportsbooks in Vegas listed their new home team with 250-1 odds to win the Stanley Cup in its inaugural season, the highest of any club. (Oh, and our Power Rankings? Here ya go.)
The unprecedented success of Vegas in Year One has caused a truly bizarre ret-conning of the expansion draft, as if the Knights were simply gifted a Western Conference championship team. There was no certainty for greatness. For every home run, there was something foul. Looking back at the formula, it was equal parts shrewd scouting, players exceeding expectations and a hearty helping of leverage.
Yes, the rules were set up so that Vegas would be better than expansion teams in the past. But the Knights certainly weren't expected to be this good right off the bat. Here's how the Golden Knights were made:
The pick: Clayton Stoner, D
The Ducks wanted to protect defensemen Josh Manson and Sami Vatanen. They loved Shea Theodore, too, but were willing to put him out as a sacrifice as long as Vegas took on Clayton Stoner's burdensome contract. The Ducks likely don't regret this; they traded Vatanen for Adam Henrique, while Manson had a great season. Plus, they didn't have to give up draft picks. Meanwhile, 22-year-old Theodore impressed many in Vegas, and the impending restricted free agent should be a big piece of the Knights' future. Stoner was buried on injured reserve.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Teemu Pulkkinen, LW
Pulkkinen was a speedy winger who needed some seasoning to become a regular. The Coyotes were fine letting him walk, especially as he became an RFA (they had plenty of wingers in the system). No regrets there. The Golden Knights were smart to avoid Jamie McGinn's hefty contract and Brad Richardson, who was returning from a terrible leg injury. Pulkkinen's 29 goals and 65 points in 75 games for the AHL Chicago Wolves were pleasant but not a shock; he could compete for the Golden Knights' roster in 2018-19.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Colin Miller, D
A 25-year-old defenseman, Miller had seen regular time for two seasons with the Bruins. It was expected that the Bruins would protect him over 29-year-old defenseman Kevan Miller because Colin is younger and has top-four potential. The Bruins did not. So Colin Miller was selected and promptly led all Knights defensemen in points (41) while playing 82 games. It turns out Boston decided to hang on to Miller Lite.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: William Carrier, LW
Buffalo viewed the 22-year-old Carrier as a player with speed and promise. The Golden Knights viewed the Sabres' expansion offerings as slim pickings and thought the 2013 second-rounder was an easy choice. Sure, Buffalo could use a young, ascending player such as Carrier, but GM Jason Botterill prioritized saving goaltending prospect Linus Ullmark. Carrier added spark and a level of grit to Vegas' bottom six in limited action (30 regular-season games) but has missed time these playoffs with injury.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Deryk Engelland, D
The Knights took the unusual step of drafting Engelland despite the fact that he was a pending unrestricted free agent. He had been a serviceable depth defenseman for the Penguins and Flames, but he set career bests in points (23), average ice time (20:17) and fewest penalty minutes (24) this season. And he was so much more than that: The 36-year-old Vegas resident served as a city ambassador for his teammates, and his emotional speech on opening night after the shooting massacre on the Strip helped immediately bond the team with the city.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Connor Brickley, C
Brickley was an unrestricted free-agent forward when McPhee selected him, coaxed by a fifth-round pick from the Hurricanes to lay off their other exposed players. The 25-year-old ended up leaving for the Panthers, with whom he had 12 points in 44 games. McPhee said there would be some throwaway picks. This was one of them, but he got a draft pick out of it.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Trevor van Riemsdyk, D
Even for a team that seems to be in perpetual salary-cap hell, the Blackhawks didn't have much to offer. It was either van Riemsdyk or Marcus Kruger ($3.1 million cap hit). The Blackhawks preferred getting Kruger's contract off the books, so they sacrificed the young defenseman. The Golden Knights shipped both to Carolina. They didn't get much in return, but again, they didn't have a lot to offer.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
The pick: Calvin Pickard, G
There was some thought that the Avalanche might expose starting goalie Semyon Varlamov, whose numbers were in decline, who was coming off two surgeries and whom McPhee drafted while with the Capitals. Instead, it was Pickard exposed by the Avs. He was quickly flipped to the Maple Leafs for 22-year-old AHL forward Tobias Lindberg, who didn't play a game in the NHL this season.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: William Karlsson, C
This is ground zero in the great "Why didn't they see this one coming?" debate. We now know "Wild Bill" Karlsson as a 43-goal scorer, a top-line center and a Selke Trophy-level defender. At the time, the Jackets felt he was "a young player who's getting better" at a log-jammed position.
So they used him as incentive for the Knights to lay off several players they didn't want to lose -- forward Josh Anderson, defenseman Jack Johnson, goalie Joonas Korpisalo -- as part of a deal the teams agreed to back in March: The Knights received a first-round pick (flipped to Winnipeg for their No. 13 pick) and a second-round pick in 2019 to select Karlsson and take on the last three seasons (and $15 million) of injured forward David Clarkson's contract. Again, they had several directions to take here. They stumbled down the exceptional one.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Cody Eakin, C
The Stars coveted the 26-year-old with a strong defensive game, but with then-new coach Ken Hitchcock preferring Jason Spezza, Tyler Seguin and Radek Faksa as his top three centers, Eakin became expendable. McPhee liked Eakin since he drafted him with the Capitals. Eakins' responsible defensive play was no surprise. He could have contributed more offensively, but you have to consider his bottom-six role and the players he was lined up with in that regard.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Tomas Nosek, LW
Everyone in hockey thought this would be goalie Petr Mrazek, who was exposed by Detroit, if only so the Knights could flip him in a trade. But they didn't do much of that. Instead, left wing Nosek, with 17 NHL games to his credit, was the pick. He had 15 points in 67 games in a bottom-six forward role for Vegas. This was OK, as Nosek helped on the penalty kill, but Jared Coreau or Riley Sheahan might have been a better selection.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Griffin Reinhart, D
Edmonton didn't have room (or patience) for Reinhart, who has played only 37 NHL games since being drafted fourth overall in 2012. It's understandable that the Oilers gave him up, but he was totally worth a flier for the Golden Knights. Reinhart got lost in the defensive logjam and spent the season in the AHL (where he appeared to be solid but not spectacular). This could still work out for Vegas if Reinhart makes the club next season, but with so many young defensemen ahead of him, it's hard to imagine Reinhart getting a regular spot.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
The pick: Jonathan Marchessault, C
There are few decisions in recent NHL history as maligned as the one Florida GM Dale Tallon made in opting to protect defensemen Mark Pysyk and Alexander Petrovic rather than Marchessault, who led the team with 30 goals in 2016-17. Vegas jumped at the chance to draft the 5-foot-9 forward, whom McPhee called "a hard-working player with no ego." Marchessault had a career-high 75 points this season, including 27 goals. He has 18 points in 15 games in the playoffs.
It gets worse for Florida: After suffering buyers' remorse on a five-year contract extension they handed him the previous summer, the Panthers also shipped winger Reilly Smith to Vegas for a fourth-round pick. Smith had 22 goals and 38 assists for Vegas, forming an unstoppable top line with Marchessault and William Karlsson. What a blunder. What a blessing.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Brayden McNabb, D
McNabb had been pushed out of the Kings' rotation by the end of last season; even still, Los Angeles prayed that the Knights might take Dustin Brown's or Marian Gaborik's contracts off its hands. Few predicted that Brown would have a renaissance campaign this season; then again, it's impossible to predict if he would have rebounded just as well on another team. Regardless, Vegas opted for the 27-year-old McNabb, who performed a bit above expectations as a regular, skating a career-high 20:09 per game.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Erik Haula, C
McPhee has said that the Wild were one of a handful of teams that he knew he had in a bind. They had to expose defensemen Matt Dumba and Marco Scandella but didn't want to lose either. So McPhee agreed to draft Haula, a fourth-line restricted free-agent forward, if the Wild surrendered one of three prospects. They settled on 21-year-old power winger Alex Tuch, the 18th overall pick in 2014, with Minnesota getting a 2018 third-round pick. Haula had a career-high 29 goals and 55 points in 76 games. Tuch had 15 goals and 37 points and was a physical menace for Vegas. It was robbery at the time, and it became worse than expected for the Wild, as both players skated meaningful minutes for Vegas in its postseason run.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Alexei Emelin, D
Last summer, the Canadiens were going through a defensive shuffle while trying to clear cap space. Hence the goodbye to Emelin and his $4.1 million cap hit. There wasn't much seller's remorse in Montreal -- let's just say Emelin's absence wasn't the catalyst for the Canadiens' collapse. The Golden Knights took Emelin with the intention to flip him and found a partner in Nashville's David Poile, who sent over a third-rounder. That seems like fair compensation for a player who ended up being a one-year rental.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: James Neal, LW
Nashville used the eight-skater option in order to protect its top four defensemen and forward Calle Jarnkrok. Neal was left exposed despite 77 goals in the past three seasons, as the 30-year-old was entering the last year of his contract. Vegas saw him as a 20-plus-goal winger who could be flipped to a contender that needed scoring in the wing for a first-rounder at the trade deadline. Neal scored 25 goals and ended up providing scoring on the wing to a contender: the Vegas Golden Knights, who kept him at the deadline thanks to their success.
Expectation: Satisfied
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
The pick: Jon Merrill, D
Merrill never developed with the Devils, playing four injury-plagued seasons there. The Knights liked his size on defense (6-foot-3) and felt that, at 25 years old, he could still develop. Merrill was a frequent healthy scratch this season and in the playoffs, yet McPhee gave him a two-year contract extension. OK, then.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
The pick: Jean-Francois Berube, G
This trade gets overshadowed by McPhee's other masterstrokes, but the Knights selected Berube after the Islanders traded them the No. 15 overall pick last summer (defenseman Erik Brannstrom), a second-round pick in 2019, defensive prospect Jake Bischoff and the final $6 million salary year of Mikhail Grabovski. That was to keep the Knights from swiping Brock Nelson, Ryan Strome, Calvin de Haan or Thomas Hickey. Berube, a free agent, left for the Blackhawks. The picks were worth it to lay off the others.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Oscar Lindberg, C
The Rangers were hamstrung by protecting a young core while managing no-movement clauses, and they had to expose players they liked, such as Lindberg. Vegas was enamored by the then-25-year-old's speed and took him instead of guys such as Jesper Fast, Antti Raanta and Michael Grabner. Fast might have been the better pick. Lindberg never found his footing in Vegas (11 points in 63 games) and has cracked the lineup in just three playoff games.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
The pick: Marc Methot, D
McPhee saw Methot as a veteran sage on the blue line who could share his 11 years of NHL experience with the young defensemen. Then he decided he had too many defensemen, so he traded Methot to the Stars for junior goalie Dylan Ferguson and Dallas' second-round pick in the 2020 draft. The Knights missed an injury-limited season for Methot (36 games). Ferguson was called up from juniors and appeared on an emergency basis in one November game.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
The pick: Pierre-Edouard Bellemare, RW
The Flyers always liked Bellemare, a defensive and penalty-killing stud whom they signed at age 29 after his long stint in Sweden. Unfortunately, they liked him too much, then found his two-year, $2.9 million contract extension no longer palatable. Bellemare's departure left open a roster spot for a young player such as Jordan Weal. Vegas happily swooped in and found Bellemare to be everything it wanted and more, especially as a team leader. This one worked out for both sides.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Marc-Andre Fleury, G
Do the Penguins have regrets about parting with Fleury? They had conviction about the younger and cheaper Matt Murray, and though -- in a thorny twist -- Murray wasn't as good as Fleury this season, it was probably the right move for the future. The Golden Knights needed a face of the franchise. They knew Fleury would win them some games. They couldn't have known he would be this spectacular.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: David Schlemko, D
The Sharks were fine parting with the journeyman Schlemko, whom they had for only one season, and had internal candidates (Joakim Ryan plugged in quite nicely) to replace him. The Golden Knights plucked him with intentions of flipping him. They did, sending him to the Canadiens for a fifth-rounder. It's hard to call this a disappointment or success; he was a Knight for only a day. But it's fair to wonder if Vegas might have gotten more out of Brendan Dillon or Dylan DeMelo.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
The pick: David Perron, LW
This one was obvious. After the Blues decided to bring back Vladimir Sobotka from the KHL, and somewhat inexplicably protect future Knight Ryan Reaves, Perron was the odd man out. He was also 29 and coming off an 18-goal season in 82 games. He scored only 16 goals but added 50 assists to give him 66 points in 70 games for Vegas, skating on the second line with James Neal. He has added seven points through 11 games in the postseason.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Jason Garrison, D
Lightning GM Steve Yzerman engineered a big deal to get Garrison's $4.6 million cap hit off the books -- and to protect Tampa Bay's younger defensemen. Garrison was put on waivers by Oct. 27, then spent most of the season in AHL purgatory. He disappointed Knights fans who expected some production out of the veteran, but perhaps this was the endgame all along. It's unclear if McPhee had any expectation that Garrison would contribute, but he squeezed a second- and a fourth-round pick out of Yzerman, plus the negotiating rights to Nikita Gusev (who ended up re-signing in the KHL).
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Brendan Leipsic, LW
A winger with a bit of a pest streak to him, Leipsic was a 23-year-old RFA the Knights signed to a two-year deal. He had two goals and 11 assists in 44 games before McPhee flipped him at the trade deadline for defenseman Philip Holm.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Luca Sbisa, D
The Canucks were waiting for the former first-round pick to step up as a top-four defenseman. The Golden Knights were willing to take the chance on Sbisa's $3.6 million cap hit, envisioning the 28-year-old as a leading mobile, two-way defenseman. It's understandable that Vancouver -- wading through a rebuild -- would brace for a divorce and that Vegas would find Sbisa attractive. He showed flashes of what he could be but struggled to stay healthy, skating in just 30 regular-season games. The Golden Knights might ask the pending unrestricted free agent to return, but likely at a reduced rate.
Expectation: Satisfied
The pick: Nate Schmidt, D
McPhee swerved the hockey world (and especially his former team) by bypassing celebrated Capitals backup goalie Philipp Grubauer for Schmidt, a smooth-skating, 25-year-old defenseman who played top-four minutes in the playoffs. McPhee signed him and envisioned him as a franchise cornerstone. Schmidt played a career-high 22:14 per game and posted a career-best 36 points in the regular season before an even more impressive postseason.
Expectation: Exceeded
The pick: Chris Thorburn, RW
The scrappy 34-year-old free-agent forward was selected after the Jets flipped first-round picks with Vegas -- swapping No. 13 for No. 24 -- and traded a third-rounder in 2019 to the Knights. This was so McPhee would lay off players like defenseman Toby Enstrom. Thorburn subsequently signed with the Blues, where he had seven points in 50 games. The Knights drafted highly rated prospect Nick Suzuki with the Jets' pick.
Expectation: Satisfied
The Golden Knights made some other notable additions along the way, and here's how they fared:
Ryan Reaves, RW (trade, Penguins)
Reaves' movements over the past year still don't make a ton of sense. The Penguins acquired him for a first-round pick, then didn't fully utilize him. They then traded him to the Golden Knights for a fourth-round pick, along with salary retention to facilitate a Derick Brassard trade. Nonetheless, Reaves was a factor in the series win over the Jets -- not just with the game-winning goal in Game 5 but also with his physical presence against a big, bruising team.
Expectation: Satisfied
Ryan Carpenter, C (waivers, Sharks)
The Sharks protected the 27-year-old forward in the expansion draft before waiving him in December, as he was unable to find a regular spot in the lineup. Vegas, as usual, made the right call: Carpenter played 36 games with 14 points and assisted on the series-winning goal to eliminate the Sharks in the semifinals.
Expectation: Exceeded
Vadim Shipachyov, C (free agent, KHL)
The Golden Knights' biggest free-agent signing was one of their biggest whiffs: The 30-year-old forward grew tired of playing in the AHL, made his displeasure known publicly and then "retired" to return home to play in Russia. McPhee later said that, symbolically, standing up to a player with a large contract had a positive impact, which is more than you can say Shipachyov did on the ice.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
Tomas Tatar, LW (trade, Red Wings)
After heavily flirting with the Senators over a potential Erik Karlsson trade, McPhee took the plunge with the Red Wings for the 27-year-old scoring winger. The price tag was preposterous, even for a team flush with picks: Vegas sent a first-round pick in 2018, a second-rounder in 2019 and a third-round pick in 2021 for Tatar. The results have been ... underwhelming. Tatar scored four goals in 20 games in the regular season and one goal in six playoff games while being a frequent healthy scratch. This is perhaps McPhee's worst move thus far ... and Tatar is signed through 2021 at $5.3 million annually.
Expectation: Unfulfilled
Malcolm Subban, G (trade, Bruins)
This was a surprise addition, especially after the Golden Knights appeared all offseason to be committed to Calvin Pickard as their backup. But Vegas pounced once it saw the 2012 first-round pick on waivers. It's a shame that Boston couldn't find a way to make it work with Subban -- or at least reap some compensation -- but the Golden Knights loved what they got. He was terrific when he could stay healthy.
Expectation: Exceeded

SASKATOON, Saskatchewan -- Friday, April 6, began like any other game day for Kaleb Dahlgren. He ordered an omelet and oatmeal at Johnny's Bistro, the tile-lined diner owned by his billet mother, Carla Clement. He went home to nap, showered and quickly threw his gear into a duffel bag. He met his Humboldt Broncos teammates at Elgar Petersen Arena, the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League team's home rink, and parked his car in the lot. As he boarded the bus for a two-hour drive north to Nipawin, where the Broncos had a playoff game against their longtime rivals, the Hawks, Dahlgren paused to chat with the bus driver, Glen Doerksen. They shared a laugh about Doerksen's previous trip with what he called "a fun group of guys."
Dahlgren took his usual seat -- fourth row from the back, on the drivers' side -- along with the rest of the team's 20-year-olds. Per tradition, the 19-year-olds occupied the rows in the middle, and the 18-year-olds were up front. Dahlgren unpacked his pregame meal: a chicken, bacon and ranch wrap. As the bus rolled along the two-lane road through the northern Saskatchewan prairie, the players chirped at each other. Dahlgren knew that teammate Nick Shumlanski's house was somewhere along the highway, so he asked him to point it out when they passed. "Nobody cares!" teammate Parker Tobin shouted, which made everyone on the bus howl with laughter. "I do," Dahlgren protested, which triggered an even louder round of laughs. About 45 minutes into the trip, Dahlgren changed into his suit so he could get in the zone for the playoff game -- a must-win for the Broncos, who were down 3-1 in their semifinal series against Nipawin after losing a heartbreaker in triple overtime at home less than 24 hours earlier. He put on his headphones, queued up a playlist of mostly hip-hop songs and looked out the window.
After that, he remembers nothing.
Golden Knights goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury met with Carson and Jackson Haugan, the sons of Broncos coach and general manager Darcy Haugan, after Wednesday night's win, letting them try on his gear and talking to them about the game.
The Humboldt Broncos, who were involved in a fatal bus crash in April, will field a team for the 2018-19 season, they announced Friday.
Four days later, Dahlgren awoke in a hospital in Saskatoon to find his parents at his side. "Why am I here?" he asked. "Did I play the game? Did we win? Did I get injured in the game? Did I get checked from behind? Was it my fault?"
His father, Mark, explained that the Broncos' bus had been in an accident. A lot of people died, Mark said. Kaleb stared back at his father, stupefied. "I'm dreaming, right? This is a dream?" he asked.
"This is not a dream, kid," said his mother, Anita.
They began telling their son the names of teammates and staff members who had died. Dahlgren seemed to be processing it all. "Well, this player was sitting here, and he was over there," he said.
Two days later, he asked his parents again why he was in the hospital. They had to explain it all over again: A truck carrying peat moss had collided with the Broncos' bus on the way to the game. Sixteen people, including Darcy Haugan, the Broncos' head coach and general manager, Doerksen and 10 of Kaleb's teammates, had been killed, and 13 others, including him, were injured.
The tragedy, they said, reverberated well beyond Saskatchewan -- and even Canada. A GoFundMe account established to collect funds for the Broncos had gone viral (and eventually raised more than $15 million from more than 140,000 donors in more than 80 countries) and thousands more people joined an online movement, #SticksOutforHumboldt, putting hockey sticks outside their front doors to remember the victims and show support for Humboldt. Dahlgren still couldn't grasp the magnitude of it, so his parents encouraged him to check his phone to see for himself.
Dahlgren remained heavily medicated those first few days in the hospital. He doesn't remember meeting Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, who visited the players. He doesn't remember Canadian TV legends Don Cherry or Ron McLean stopping by or then-Calgary Flames coach Glen Gulutzan or Edmonton Oilers coach Todd McLellan. "I wish I would have remembered that stuff," he said. "But I don't."
Each day, Dahlgren became a little more lucid and less agitated. When doctors could finally get him to sit still long enough for an MRI, the full extent of his injuries was revealed: a fractured skull, a puncture wound in his head, two broken vertebrae in his neck and four others in his back and a brain injury. Then came the hardest part for the Dahlgrens: accepting their new reality.
Kaleb Dahlgren was released from the hospital on April 27 and went home to Saskatoon with his parents. That he had regained enough strength to meet for an interview -- much less walk, albeit gingerly -- by May 9 was something of a miracle. His hair was still bleached blonde, the result of a bonding pact his teammates made before the playoffs, though his brown roots had grown in substantially. The only visible evidence of his injury was a shaved patch above his left forehead, revealing road rash, and the fact that when Dahlgren went in for an embrace, he had to remind the recipient: "Gentle hugs, please."
Doctors told Mark Dahlgren that only 3 to 5 percent of people recover from Kaleb's type of brain injury. But less than a week into his stay at the hospital, Kaleb had convinced doctors to let him start light workouts and physiotherapy. When he was released, his medical team was awed by his progress.
The neurosurgeons told Dahlgren that the best remedies for brain injuries are rest, fresh air and eating greens. He took the advice to heart. He attends physiotherapy three days a week. He religiously gets eight hours of sleep, plus a 90-minute nap during the day. He also has become a regular at the local juice shop, where his go-to order is an apple, celery, kale, spinach, cucumber, lime and ginger smoothie. He is working his way through a book about recovery from brain injuries, which recommends getting plenty of stimulation, so he made sudoku a habit and likes to play a puzzle game called 1010! on his phone. Dahlgren can't fly until June 6, however, which means he had to turn down half a dozen invitations to attend NHL playoff games. Everyone from the Pittsburgh Penguins to Vegas Golden Knights defenseman Brayden McNabb -- another Saskatchewan native, who insisted Dahlgren stay over for at least two games -- has reached out.
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan are on opposite coasts, and they delve into the Vegas-Winnipeg and Tampa Bay-Washington conference final matchups. Brian Boucher of NBC talks goalie play, and the crew discusses the impact of new sports gambling regulations on the NHL. Plus, all of your favorite segments of the week! Listen »
Four of Dahlgren's teammates are still in Saskatoon hospitals, while others have been released or moved to facilities closer to their homes. (Most of the players, like Dahlgren, are not from Humboldt but live there with billet families during the season.) The Saskatchewan Royal Canadian Mounted Police investigation into the crash is still ongoing. On April 19, the RCMP said that the truck driver has been cooperating with authorities, but it is unclear if he blew past a stop sign or why he was in the middle of the intersection.
The Dahlgrens say they don't need to know the cause of the accident to find closure. "If the [truck] driver was under the influence, I might be angry he chose to do that," Mark said. "But right now, I feel bad for him. I can't imagine what he's going through. I'm sure he didn't set out that morning to have a bus hit him and have all these injuries and deaths. We have a lot of support around us, but he's out there and has nothing. If he has a family, it can't be easy for his family either. I feel bad for him. I don't feel anger toward him."
The Dahlgrens are also grappling with survivor's guilt. The parents of the Humboldt Broncos players have maintained a group text, which includes everyone wishing one another goodnight.
"When we were all together, we were able to physically support each other -- give hugs, talk about their kids, our kids, all that was good," Mark said. "Now that we're apart, it's super-duper hard. For the ones who lost their kids, I feel for their pain. But having a son who survived, it's hard finding the words to help them get through it. I know they're happy and very supportive of Kaleb's recovery, but I feel like there is nothing that I can say that's going to help them. They're going through a difficult path. We're going through a portion of that path, but we've taken a bit of a fork. We're beside them, but we're not with them."
Kaleb says his biggest regret is being in the hospital during his teammates' funerals. "What will they think of me, that I couldn't be there for them?" he asked his father. But he hadn't healed enough to leave. Mark and Anita attended as many funerals as they could -- 10 of the 16 -- and each time, they wore Kaleb's Broncos jerseys.
Like most Canadian kids, Kaleb Dahlgren was drawn to hockey at a young age. An only child, he was tearing around the living room on Rollerblades by age 2, on the ice at 2½ and skating with bigger kids at 3½. Mark installed a smoke machine and lights in the family's basement. Every night, he and Kaleb would pretend they were playing in a different NHL city, come out to their own intro, sing "O Canada" and play three periods of hockey.
When Kaleb was 9, Mark took him on a tour of North Dakota's Ralph Engelstad Arena. The rest of the group began getting agitated because Kaleb asked so many questions that it was slowing down the tour. The guide told Kaleb that if he would stay silent for the rest of the tour, he would give him an extended one afterward. On the drive home, Kaleb told his father it was his dream to play hockey in college.
Kaleb, a right wing, initially played with the Notre Dame Hounds, a junior "A" team based in Wilcox, Saskatchewan (population: fewer than 400). But he wanted to be in a bigger community because volunteering was important to him, so last summer Dahlgren asked for a trade. He was born with Type 1 diabetes and wanted to start a program to work with kids who share the chronic condition. The Hounds didn't want to give Dahlgren up, but they agreed to honor his request. They got so many offers that they let Dahlgren choose his destination. He picked Humboldt because of its hockey history and because he knew players who had played there and raved about the program. Right away, Dahlgren got a call from the coach, Darcy Haugan. "Hey, we're super excited to have you," he said.
Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
In Humboldt, Dahlgren created a program called Dahlgren's Diabeauties. Through the program, kids with diabetes attend Broncos games and participate in ceremonial faceoffs. Then their families meet with Dahlgren after the game to talk about managing life with diabetes. Dahlgren also volunteered at the elementary school on Wednesdays, tutoring kids in reading, and he ran the rec hockey program on Sundays. It wasn't until after the crash that Mark Dahlgren really understood what an impact his son had made on the Humboldt community in such a short time. In the hospital, Dahlgren told his father that the first thing he wanted to do when he got out was visit Humboldt. So they made the one-hour drive back there from Saskatoon shortly after his release. It was there that a woman at a home for the elderly told Mark that his son not only came to visit her on her birthday but also brought her flowers.
Mark also found out that Kaleb had created another program called Dahlgren's Taxi. A group of developmentally disabled people who lived at a group home loved to go to Broncos games, but Kaleb found out they were upset that the ride that took them there got to the games late and left early. So before every home game, Kaleb would pick them up at 4:45 p.m. on his way to the arena. They got to throw pucks for warm-ups and stay late -- sometimes waiting out the Dahlgren's Diabeauties meetings -- so he could drive them home.
"When we visited, I saw the community that he made there," his father said.
On the night of April 6, Mark and Anita were getting dinner on the main drag in Nipawin before the game. "And then we looked out the window and saw firetruck, firetruck, ambulance, ambulance, RCMP, RCMP pass," Mark recalled. "Holy cow, that's a lot of emergency vehicles."
A woman came up to the register in the restaurant and said that she had heard a semi had hit a bus not far away. Mark's and Anita's faces fell. "Do you know someone on the bus?" the woman asked. "Our son," said Mark, who recalled that some people in the restaurant started crying. He can't remember if he paid for the meal before racing out of the restaurant.
Mark and Anita are both nurses, so they decided to drive to the crash site. Either they would find a bunch of agitated teenagers upset that they were late to the game, or they would be able to help.
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
As they approached the intersection of Highway 335 and Highway 35, they saw a line of cars -- but no bus. As they pulled over into the ditch, they saw the carnage. Bags of peat moss were everywhere, shoes and shirts strewn all over the field, hockey bags emptied. They couldn't differentiate between the front and the back of the bus. As they saw bodies being pulled from the wreckage, Anita tried to see if any shoes resembled Kaleb's.
"Nobody was being put on stretchers," Mark said. "We didn't think anyone was going to make it. We thought Kaleb was dead."
They were told to go to the Nipawin rec center, then to a nearby church. They waited anxiously, for five hours, for any news. Strangers offered drinks and hot meals. The Broncos families tried to find comfort in one another.
Survivors had been taken to three local hospitals, but it was unclear who was where or who was alive. The Dahlgrens finally got a call from a local pastor.
"He said, 'Kaleb is here [at the hospital],'" Mark recalled. "Everyone started hugging us and cheering because we were going to the hospital, and they knew someone was alive. But it was hard because we were leaving them there, and they still didn't know the fate of their sons."
When they arrived at the Nipawin hospital, Anita and Mark found Kaleb sitting in an office that had been cleared out because the facility had run out of room. Their usually upbeat son was ornery -- and cold to the touch, Mark says. He and Anita found blankets to wrap him in. Soon, Kaleb was airlifted to Saskatoon.
At the next hospital, Dahlgren shared a room with teammates Derek Patter, Graysen Cameron, Ryan Straschnitzki and later Xavier Labelle.
"That helped," Kaleb said, "because we felt like a team in there."
Although his memory was foggy in those early days, Dahlgren remembers meeting Joe Sakic, Connor McDavid and Ryan O'Reilly. He loved getting a call from Arizona Coyotes star Max Domi (who also has Type 1 diabetes) as well as from St. Louis Blues center and fellow Saskatoon native Brayden Schenn. Dahlgren feels bad about accidentally dissing Flames star Johnny Gaudreau when he visited. "I was pretty drugged up, and Mark Giordano asked me who I thought was better, Connor McDavid or Johnny Gaudreau," Dahlgren said. "I guess I said McDavid ... to Johnny's face. I did not mean to chirp him. He is unreal at hockey."
Dahlgren also got a visit from Nathan, the first responder who tended to him at the crash site. "I am forever grateful for him and everyone who helped," he said, noting that the first responder told him that he was trying to help teammates to safety before more medical personnel arrived on the scene. When Dahlgren was put on a stretcher and into the ambulance, he turned to the first responder and said, "I'm a Type 1 diabetic, my name is Kaleb Dahlgren, thank you."
"He tossed me in the ambulance and said, 'I'll never forget that guy,'" Dahlgren said. "And I'll now never forget him either."
Doctors have told Dahlgren that there's a chance that one day he will regain his memory from the crash -- which terrifies him. However, part of him wants to know some of the last things he said to his teammates and what they said to him. "I think that would be really tough to remember," he said. "I think if that day comes that I would remember it, I'd take it, but if it doesn't come, that's fine too."
Now Dahlgren is focused on returning to the ice. He kept in touch with the college coaches who had been recruiting him. On May 11, he announced that he would continue his hockey career at York University in Toronto. His goal is to start college next fall, but it will depend on how quickly he recovers. The school has assured Dahlgren that he can start whenever he feels ready.
"I have big goals," he said. "I want to play hockey again. I'm going to play hockey again. I'm going to play college [hockey] and get an education."

TUSCALOOSA, Ala. — Stepping into Nick Saban’s office is stepping into a time warp. A velvety red curtain dims the sunlight behind his presidential desk; two straw hats rest on a carved wooden pole in the corner. The oriental rugs and leather tufted chairs are accessories to a Victorian home, not a glitzy, multibillion-dollar football facility.
Saban is a traditionalist. In his world, the hurry-up offense is sacrilege, shocking and separating from a blocker and tackling in open space is welcome in the first 20 minutes of practice (physicality, after all, won him four out the last seven national championships). Mention satellite camps to the 64-year-old and you had better be talking about something involving NASA.
Practices are planned months in advance. The only newspaper Saban reads regularly is the Tuscaloosa News. He eats Little Debbie pies for breakfast and the same iceberg lettuce salad every day for lunch, because he has better things to do than waste time deciding what to eat. Saban is mysterious, he is intense, he is always sought-after—you can bet any college or NFL team would hire him in a second.
This season, I’ll be writing a college football column for The MMQB. The idea is, along with addressing the wildly popular college version of the sport, to bridge the gap between NFL and NCAA football. You’ll hear from scouts, NFL personnel and influencers you never knew existed. You’ll meet the everyone from big-time coaches to Heisman front-runners to this year’s Carson Wentz (still in the process of identifying him, stay tuned).
For the debut, I visited Tuscaloosa to meet Saban; for the NFL, he’s the one that got away. Ever since his abrupt divorce from the Dolphins after the 2006 season, Saban’s name has bubbled up regarding NFL openings. With each passing year, however, a return to the NFL seems more unlikely. As Phil Savage, the former NFL GM and Crimson Tide radio color analyst explains it: Alabama has become a lifestyle for Saban. His mother lives in Birmingham. He has a grandchild nearby. His uncle is on the sidelines for game day. Taking another job would disrupt that.
Even if Saban never returns to the NFL, the man who has groomed 55 draft picks (including 18 first-rounders) since 2009 has unparalleled perspective on the college and NFL Venn diagram. In a candid conversation, Saban—with a late August tan and his Sperrys perched on an antique coffee table—discussed career regrets, draft reform and a growing divide between college and pro offenses. The coach in his own words…

I’ve had other opportunities to go to the NFL, and I’ve just chosen not to do it. Look, I love the NFL. I have no problem with the NFL. The one thing about college coaching that always appealed to me is the chance to impact young people at a critical time in their development. Having a good program gives you positive self-gratification. In the NFL, it’s strictly about bringing in the best and evaluating the best players for your team and managing the business part.
When I was in Miami, we tried to do things to help players. We created an education program—[owner] Wayne Huizenga was great about this—an opportunity for guys to finish their degrees. We tried to have as much as the Players Association would allow us, including a program for guys with addiction issues. Having a drug program that tests people is not really a drug program, that’s a testing program. Having a program that helps them deal with the issue is completely different. We went through this with Ricky Williams, and he actually made progress and I hope did better because of it.

I used to think at the end of the day, being a head coach in the NFL was the No. 1 thing. But when I got to that, it was like, Well maybe you already had the No. 1 thing for you and what you like.

I’m not opposed to guys coming out early for the draft. And for the most part, there have only been a few guys who have not made a good decision. Part of that has been, we’re open all the time. When scouts come in, I always tell them to look at all of our potential guys because I want them to be able to get accurate information. Having been in the NFL, there are two parts to the draft: There’s what a guy’s draft grade is, and there’s where he’s going to be drafted. That gets affected by supply and demand and a lot of other things. Well, it’s very difficult for the NFL to just submit a junior draft grade. They don’t have background on the guy, speed on the guy, measurements.
Once you enter the draft, everyone is looking for reasons not to draft you.
So I recommend that instead of waiting until December for guys to submit grades, why don’t we do it in the spring before the season? When your seniors work out and get measurements, they can actually test the younger guys and give them all the tests, the Wonderlic and all the stuff they do at the combine, so that they have the information. Then they can evaluate that guy through the season just as they do the seniors. So when you do submit your name, you get a much more accurate assessment.
If you’re not going to get drafted in the first two rounds, you should’ve stayed in school.
But the inaccurate information is what the external world uses to convince guys they should come out. In other words, you can get a Back to School grade, but there’s a bunch of people telling you six guys got drafted in the first round that got Back to School grades. So you should come out anyway, because they might be wrong. And you can go to the combine and improve your draft status. What they don’t understand is, once you enter the draft, everyone is looking for reasons not to draft you. Character checks, physically, mentally, everything. They’re looking for reasons not to draft you. Well, most people go down, not up.
The basketball model doesn’t work. We can’t say, “You declared for the draft. Go to the combine and do all of this stuff, and if it doesn’t work out come back.” We have 85 guys on scholarship. We would have 15 guys doing that every year. I wouldn’t know in March when spring practice hit, who we would have available. Then how could you manage your recruiting numbers? It just involves too many numbers.
We had a conference call [with the NFL] about it. I think everyone was in agreement. Basically I called, Jimbo [Fisher], Dabo [Swinney], Bob Stoops, Urban [Meyer]—guys that have a few guys every year, and tried to get their input. This is the comprehensive input from all of us. Then we had a conference call with the competition committee, and they had some ideas too. Whether this gets implemented next year or not, I don’t know, but I haven’t seen a lot of resistance from either side.

Yeah, I kind of do think there is. There’s one rule that affects that: linemen downfield. Because what college offenses have done, we call it RPOs [Run Pass Options]. If you're on a running play, and these two guys are on a slant, and the quarterback just pulls the ball and goes on a slant and the offensive linemen don’t even know if it’s a pass. So it’s impossible to coach defensive players.
That rule has changed college football dramatically. I’m not saying it’s good, bad or indifferent. But if you don’t do that as a college team, you’re not taking advantage of a rule that grants you tremendous latitude in how you play offense. However, in doing that, the quarterback doesn’t really have to go through a progression, doesn’t have to read coverage, doesn’t have to change a protection. He doesn’t have to be an NFL quarterback. From that standpoint, the skill players on offense don’t develop in the same system that they will learn to play in the NFL.
Does it affect defensive players? Probably not as much, even though they get put into some impossible run-pass conflicts. They’re still learning how to take on blocks, they’re still learning how to read plays, they’re still learning how to cover people. I’m not sure it affects the defensive players all that much. I do think it affects the quarterback, and his development. These guys can have tremendous success and not be NFL ready. Blake Sims was a great example of that. AJ McCarron is going to be a fine NFL quarterback and he ran what was basically an NFL system. But Blake Sims was not that kind of guy. Blake actually set [Alabama’s] all-time record for total offense, but as an NFL quarterback he didn’t have a lot of opportunity.

I think football is a great game. But I do think we all have to be very conscious of player safety. I think we have taken steps to help that, and I’ve been very involved with doctors that are concussion experts trying to help every way that we can. I think the equipment is better. I think the concussion protocol is so much better. That’s critical. When I played, as soon as you knew your name, they’d put you back in. Now I’m not complaining about that, but now we have legitimate testing that tells you when a guy is O.K. If a guy has reccurring issues, he shouldn’t play. He may be someone who is susceptible to these types of things, and playing is not a good thing for him.
So am I concerned about the future of football? I see the obstacle as an opportunity to try to make it better, so I focus on that part of it.

* * *


* * *

“He’s the guy everyone is buzzing about. I’ve watched some of his tape and the hype is real… He wins battles in multiple ways, but you have to check out his inside spin move… Great motor and very nice first step… Had a real good matchup against [former Mississippi left tackle and 2016 Dolphins first-round pick] Laremy Tunsil last year. Tunsil won most of the battles, but I liked what I saw in Garrett’s technique and burst around the edge.”





* * *
Nick Saban doesn't text. He will read a text. Then respond with a phone call. But according to those in the Alabama football office, the coach has never sent a text in his life. (And yes, he does have a smart phone).
* * *




* * *



For the Nashville Predators and Winnipeg Jets' second-round series, the NBCSN broadcasting crew consists of play-by-play broadcaster Chris Cuthbert as well as analysts Brian Boucher and AJ Mleczko. Like many crews this time of year, the team had limited experience together but was thrust together for important games and needed to forge chemistry on the fly.
Unlike any other broadcasting crew in Stanley Cup playoff history, one of the members is a woman. Mleczko, 42, is the first woman to work as an in-booth analyst in an NHL postseason game. The significance wasn't lost on ice level, but it wasn't overdramatized either.
The veteran thrives playing a "playoff-style game" on a team full of skill, and he is a critical piece as Pittsburgh looks to get back into the series.
We follow Catfish Jake as he buys the perfect fish, smuggles it into Bridgestone Arena and launches it onto the ice.
"That's awesome. A lot of women play hockey and are really good at hockey," said Predators center Nick Bonino, whose wife, Lauren, was a standout player at Boston University. "It's unfortunate it took this long to happen, but we're all really happy about it."
Responded Mleczko: "I think Nick's answer is perfect. I like that he doesn't seem too surprised by it. ... I wish that this wasn't a big deal. I'm thrilled to be given these opportunities by NBC. I also think, soon enough, it'll come that it isn't a big deal."
Mleczko, of course, is a former standout player herself. A Patty Kazmaier winner at Harvard, the forward competed in the inaugural women's Olympic hockey tournament at the 1998 Games in Nagano -- when Team USA won gold -- and picked up a silver in Salt Lake City in 2002. Professional hockey for women didn't exist then, so when the 2003 Hockey Championships were canceled last minute because of the SARS epidemic, Mleczko's playing career unceremoniously ended. She and her husband, Jason, had their first child in December 2003.
"It's different now, and because of the awesome things that Team USA did last spring fighting for equal pay -- it was really hard to make a living back when I played," she said. "It is still hard."
Like many athletes, Mleczko hadn't quite considered what she wanted to do after playing, but she wanted to keep a foot in hockey. In spring 2005, then-NBC Olympics producer Molly Solomon cold-called Mleczko. "Do you have any interest in broadcasting? Solomon asked.
"I said, 'Sure,'" Mleczko recalls. "I had no idea, but that sounds great."
Greg Wyshynski and Emily Kaplan go around the horn on each series in the second round and cover the trials of Tom Wilson and Department of Player Safety. Plus, conversations with NBCSN's AJ Mleczko and Sabres GM Jason Botterill. Listen »
Mleczko took the train from Boston to NBC's studios in Connecticut. She was led to a small, soundproof booth, which Mleczko describes as "a tiny little box." Waiting for her would be her tryout partner: legendary play-by-play man Doc Emrick. "I dressed nicely. I was told to wear an on-camera outfit," Mleczko said. "And I'm sweating. I'm absolutely sweating but trying to smile through it."
And then another twist: The game they would be mock-calling? The 2002 Salt Lake City gold medal game in which Mleczko and Team USA cruised through the early tournament, outscoring opponents 31-1, but fell in a tightly contested gold-medal game to rival Canada. "I had no interest in watching it again, because we lost and it was heartbreaking," she said. "Canada played a lot better than we did, so I didn't want to watch it."
But Mleczko trudged on. "What do I do if I need to refer to myself?" she asked before producers began recording. "They said, 'Just refer to yourself in third person.' It was very surreal," Mleczko said. "I avoided any mention of myself."
After the first period, Solomon provided feedback, which made the rest of the mock broadcast even more tense for Mleczko. "The second period was another level of intimidation," she said. "I was trying to improve on the fly." Luckily, NBC spared Mleczko the third period -- and medal celebration. She said goodbye and got back on a train and received an email thanking her for making the trip. "I thought that was the end of my broadcasting career," she said. "The two hours, it was fun while it lasted."
And then Mleczko got the call: NBC wanted her to work the 2006 Games in Torino. She was "pleasantly surprised to try a new adventure." All the while, her family continued to grow; she arrived in Torino seven months pregnant with her second child, who was due in April that year. "I kept thinking, 'They're going to train me, they're going to help me,'" Mleczko said. "Nope. That's the one thing NBC has done -- it's sink or swim."
Anyone in broadcasting will say the key is getting in reps, and the Olympics provided ample. "We'd call two or three games a day, and if you screw up one game, well, you have another game in an hour. You have time to fix it," she said. Mleczko credits a great producer who helped her, as well as her broadcast mates -- Emrick and Kenny Albert, whom she calls "two of the best in the business."
"As a team sport athlete, I really like that broadcasting brings that team atmosphere," she said. It also turned out Mleczko was a natural.
"I've been around hockey long enough that I have confidence in the way I see the game," she said. "I feel good about my knowledge, I feel confident in my opinions about things. That's all they are, opinions on hockey."
Mleczko, who has four children -- ages 14, 12, 10 and 6, two boys and two girls -- loved getting opportunities with NBC at the Olympic games. She's worked the past four winter Olympics and broadcast field hockey at the 2016 Games in Rio. "But I'm not getting the reps in between," she said. "So even though I'm a veteran Olympic broadcaster, every time I go, I feel like I need to shake the rust off."
Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
At Pyeongchang this year, NBC made another ask: What was she doing on March 6, and would she like to broadcast a Boston Bruins game? It was a natural fit for Mleczko, who lives in Boston, is familiar with the Bruins and wouldn't need to travel. She did a ton of prep work, especially on the Bruins' opponents, the Detroit Red Wings.
The game was on a Tuesday. On Saturday, Mleczko was coaching her daughter's hockey practice when one of the players lost control and slid right into Mleczko's legs, knocking her to the ground. Mleczko was wearing a helmet and says she followed concussion protocol. On Saturday and Sunday, she battled headaches and sat in a dark room. Mleczko, who has pledged her brain to the Concussion Legacy Foundation, is an advocate of concussion awareness and wants to use the example as a reminder to always wear a helmet when coaching. She says she was fine in time for Tuesday's game, but there were other distractions. Since it was a hometown game, The Boston Globe wanted to spotlight her. She had also just come back from her time in South Korea.
Mleczko did well enough in the game that NBC gave her a game a week for March and then the playoff assignment -- which has been thrilling, but also unpredictable. Like all broadcasters, she doesn't get her schedule until sometimes a day or two before a game, which makes coordinating child care another challenge (she credits a great husband and friends).
Mleczko is her own harshest critic -- "If you're speaking for a long period of time, you're not going to love everything that comes out of your mouth" -- but has received good reviews both internally and externally. For example, NBC keeps extending her playoff assignment. When she was at the airport flying from Nashville back home to Boston after Game 2, she found out NBC wanted her to stay on for the rest of the series. She made a quick pit stop home, grabbed her passport and a new set of clothes, and pivoted to Winnipeg.
"All the players have been fantastic and easy to talk to," Mleczko said. "I'd be remiss in not mentioning there are other women who do do this. Cassie Campbell, a former competitor of mine and big rival [with Team Canada], but we've become very friendly -- mostly through doing the Olympics -- and she does great work. Meghan Duggan is doing postgame for the Bruins. Monique Lamoureux is doing work with NHL Network. Haley Skarupa has done stuff with the Capitals. It's really cool to see these doors are being opened, and there are more and more opportunities coming."
Full coverage of the 2018 draft »
Every pick of the draft »
Draft grades for all 31 teams
Winners and losers »
Round 1 analysis
As Mleczko continually prepares for her current assignment -- she says it's common to use only about 3 percent of her notes in a broadcast -- she thinks about one of her biggest mentors, Emrick, whom she has called three gold-medal games with (not including their mock broadcast of the 2002 game).
"He doesn't get caught up in details even though he somehow spits them out -- that's not what he's focused on," Mleczko said. She also loves how he can look at the bigger picture and ask unexpected questions. For example, at the 2014 Olympics, Emrick asked USA coach Katey Stone: "When you leave Sochi, what do you want people to remember about Team USA?"
"It was a cool question," Mleczko said. "It wasn't about the power play, it wasn't about this player as a superstar or the lineup, it was about the big picture and what do you want to take home about your team."
So the same question is posed to Mleczko: After these playoffs, what do you want people to remember about you?
Mleczko pauses. "I hope for my preparation and my knowledge and not for being a woman," she said. "I hope I'm not just remembered for being a woman in the booth in a Round 2 NHL playoff game. I hope that people listen to the game and they're not constantly reminded that a woman is calling this game. It's hockey people in the booth talking hockey."

Before we get to the potential replacements for Chuck Fletcher as Minnesota Wild general manager, a few words about the executive whose nine-year run ended Monday when the team announced he wouldn't be offered a new contract.Editor's PicksFletcher out as general manager of WildThe Wild will not offer a new contract to general manager Chuck Fletcher.The Wild's offseason game planIt was another one-and-out in the playoffs for Minnesota. How do the Wild get over the hump? Here are keys to the summer.1 Related
The Wild will not offer a new contract to general manager Chuck Fletcher.
It was another one-and-out in the playoffs for Minnesota. How do the Wild get over the hump? Here are keys to the summer.
The defining moment of Fletcher's tenure came on July 4, 2012, when he spent $196 million of Wild owner Craig Leipold's money on identical 13-year contracts for forward Zach Parise and defenseman Ryan Suter. The Wild had missed the playoffs for four consecutive seasons. For reasons both monetary and geographic, the two most prized NHL free agents that summer both chose to sign in Minnesota. "We shot for the moon. We tried our best. And fortune smiled upon us," said Fletcher at the time.
If you wanted to repurpose that statement as an epitaph for Fletcher's tenure, then two out of three ain't bad.
He tried his best? Sure. The Wild spent the next six seasons in the playoffs, although they advanced past the first round only twice. Did they shoot for the moon? Debatable. Parise and Suter were by far the most significant, impactful moves Fletcher made -- on the ice and for business. He could never land the big-ticket center his lineup lacked until Eric Staal found the fountain of youth this season in Minneapolis. Some of Fletcher's trades were terrific (Cal Clutterbuck for Nino Niederreiter!), some of them were atrocious (Marco Scandella and Jason Pominville for Tyler Ennis and Marcus Foligno) and some of them were well-intended disappointments (who knew Brent Burns would leave Minnesota and become the defenseman he has become with the San Jose Sharks?). They whiffed on some draft picks, and others just didn't develop as intended.
But fortune didn't smile upon the Wild and Chuck Fletcher. They were a middling team without the A-list talent found on other Western Conference contenders. When the Nashville Predators and Winnipeg Jets lapped them while the Wild were still taking incremental steps to contention -- with young players, rather than Minnesota's 33-and-over core -- you knew changes were coming.
So who are the GM candidates who might go Wild? Here are a few options, starting with the clubhouse leader:ESPNA name to watch out for in the Minnesota Wild GM search: Paul Fenton, the longtime assistant GM of the Nashville Predators. Fenton is considered one of the best GM-ready candidates in the league. Remember: Wild owner Craig Leipold previously owned the Preds. You have to wonder if another man with Nashville ties could be linked there should the coaching position become open as well: current Capitals coach Barry Trotz.Emily Kaplan, ESPN341d ago
A name to watch out for in the Minnesota Wild GM search: Paul Fenton, the longtime assistant GM of the Nashville Predators. Fenton is considered one of the best GM-ready candidates in the league. Remember: Wild owner Craig Leipold previously owned the Preds. You have to wonder if another man with Nashville ties could be linked there should the coaching position become open as well: current Capitals coach Barry Trotz.
Paul Fenton. As Emily Kaplan noted, Leipold and Fenton go way back, to a time when Leipold owned the Predators. Fenton was Nashville's director of player personnel for eight seasons and has been its assistant general manager since 2006. If there's a GM job open, Fenton has been mentioned for it. But he has patiently waited, happy with a plum gig in Nashville and having his pick of opportunities. Perhaps the Wild will be the combination of team and comfort level he has sought.
Tom Fitzgerald. The New Jersey Devils' assistant general manager ticks a couple of boxes for the Wild. He is familiar to Leipold, having played for the Predators from 1998-2002. He also served as director of player personnel for GM Ray Shero with the Pittsburgh Penguins. Another Shero disciple? Chuck Fletcher.Bill Guerin won the Stanley Cup as a player with the Penguins in 2009 -- and has lifted Lord Stanley twice more as the team's assistant general manager. Charles LeClaire-USA TODAY Sports
Bill Guerin. Currently an assistant general manager with the Penguins and the general manager of their AHL affiliate, the former NHL player interviewed with the Buffalo Sabres and is considered a rising star in the managerial ranks. Will the Penguins seek to keep him around for themselves?
Bill Zito. Recently named general manager of the 2018 U.S. men's national team, Zito is a former player agent who has worked with the Columbus Blue Jackets since 2013. He is the GM of their AHL affiliate in Cleveland Monsters. He might not be the short-term fixer the Wild want, but Zito is certainly someone who could offer a unique take on the Minnesota roster.
Kelly McCrimmon. While it's hard to imagine McCrimmon leaving the Vegas Golden Knights after this dream of an inaugural season, it's also hard to imagine someone like the Wild not at least kicking the tires on one of the executives behind a record-shattering expansion team. McCrimmon is no newbie -- he was with the Brandon Wheat Kings of the Western Hockey League for 28 seasons as a general manager and coach.The Stanley Cup playoffs on ESPNStanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGSConference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJRound 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ

Stanley Cup Playoffs Central »
Experts' picks | Schedule »
Conference final results:
• TB-WSH | • WPG-VGS
Conference semifinal results:
• TB-BOS | • WSH-PIT
• NSH-WPG | • VGS-SJ
Round 1 results:
• TB-NJ | • BOS-TOR
• WSH-CBJ | • PIT-PHI
• NSH-COL | • WPG-MIN
• VGS-LA | • ANA-SJ
Brent Flahr. The Wild's senior vice president of hockey operations is the team's acting general manager now that Fletcher's contract wasn't renewed. Flair has been the assistant general manager since 2009. That's worthy of a mention, because if the Washington Capitals have taught us anything it is that the solution might come from within the front office. But Leipold's declaration that the roster needs "a new set of eyes" probably doesn't bode well for Flahr.
Dean Lombardi. The former Los Angeles Kings general manager has two Stanley Cups on his ledger, which is a heck of a calling card when Leipold has been adamant that this move was made to bring in "someone new" to win a Cup with the group they have. He's currently working in the Philadelphia Flyers' organization under Ron Hextall.
Pierre McGuire. Don't laugh. He came very close to getting the Penguins GM job in 2014. If the Wild job comes down to selling Leipold on the idea that the candidate has all the answers, Pierre will be the first to tell you he's the smartest guy in the room.

Tyler Bieber, who was a broadcaster for the Humboldt Broncos, will be the first of the Humboldt bus crash victims to be laid to rest Thursday. He was 29.
His funeral is being held Thursday at Elgar Petersen Arena in Humboldt, Saskatchewan, where the Broncos played their home games.
Bieber was a New England Patriots fan. Upon hearing this, the Patriots sent flowers for the services. Additionally, team owner Robert Kraft left a voicemail for Bieber's mother on Wednesday expressing his condolences.
Sidney Crosby sent signed messages to the survivors of the junior hockey bus crash that killed 15 people.
Bieber was in his first year as a play-by-play announcer for the Broncos. The junior hockey team was en route to a playoff game last Friday when its bus collided with a truck carrying peat moss. Of the 29 people on board, 16 have died, including the team coach, players and bus driver.
On Wednesday, athletic therapist Dayna Brons became the 16th victim of the crash when she died in the hospital as a result of her injuries. She was 25.
Services for players Adam Herold and Jacob Leicht are scheduled for Friday. Herold's funeral will be in his hometown of Montmartre, Saskatchewan. Leicht's funeral will also be in Humboldt.
Saskatchewan Royal Canadian Mounted Police said Wednesday it is still investigating circumstances of crash. RCMP will "continue to dedicate significant resources to ensure a thorough investigation" though that investigation can take "significant time." Dozens of interviews have been conducted, with more to come. Vehicle computer data is being recovered and analyzed.
Also Wednesday, the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League announced It will finish its season. The decision for the SJHL to play its championship series came from a conference call among the league's board, which issued a statement saying "the power of healing is in the game."
The league championship series will be between the Power Dodge Estevan Bruins and the Nipawin Hawks. Game 1 is Saturday in Nipawin.
Nipawin was involved in a playoff series against Humboldt when the tragic crash occurred.



* * *
NEWBURY, Ohio — To get to that “critical juncture,” drive 40 miles east of Cleveland, the last few miles past country barns and rusty auto-parts shops, and you’ll come to a school, Newbury High, that loves football—but in October had to make the kind of decision coaches and administrators in many American communities are increasingly being confronted with. 
In early October, Newbury High trailed a more powerful Lutheran East team 44-0 in the third quarter. A scene as uncomfortable as it is familiar played out on the field: As a Newbury Black Knight player was strapped onto a stretcher, a blanket of silence enveloped the field, mothers and fathers sorrowful in the bleachers, downcast players kneeling near their injured teammate.
Newbury began the game with 15 players. This was the fifth one lost for the game. The first four had injuries to limbs, but as this Black Knight lay motionless, paramedics intervened. Murmurs of “concussion” and “spinal injury” swept the stadium. The referees and coaches congregated. “What should we do now?” Newbury coach Tim Gladowski asked the group.
Newbury’s 11 starters usually play both ways. Now five of them were ruled out. Lutheran East had a full roster, and even during warmups its players were noticeably bulkier and taller than the Black Knights. The inequity had expanded exponentially. Perhaps, an assistant coach suggested, they could shorten the quarters. Maybe, another coach inquired, the clock could run through timeouts?

“So I have the ability to stop this?” Chaffee asked.
After a pause, the officials said yes.
“OK,” Chaffee said. “I’m going to make this easy for you, coach. We’re done. I don’t foresee anything good happening in the next 17 minutes.”
A few days later the Black Knights cancelled their remaining three games. They finished the season 0-7—with anger, frustration and no resolution. The player taken to the hospital was released that night but likely would not have been cleared for the next game. It wasn’t just him. A week later Chaffee sat in on a class with another injured Black Knight. The player sneezed and instantly winced, grabbing his shoulder. Said athletic director Anthony Forfia: “We knew why we had to make this decision. What we’re grappling with now is, what does it mean going forward?”
* * *

But gauging the status of America’s beloved high school sports tradition in this climate is complicated. Statistics are not kept on how many schools like Newbury slash their program midseason, though it seems to be occurring more frequently. Nor is there any systematic tracking of schools that drop football or their reasons for doing so. Predicting the future is murky as well. While participation rates for high school football have declined nationwide in six of the last seven years and are down 2.5 percent overall since 2008-09, it would be premature to conclude from that stat alone that high school football is in danger. Even with that drop, there were 1.084 million boys (and some 1,500 girls) playing high school football last year, nearly twice the number of the next most popular sport, track and field. Basketball’s participation numbers are down as well from 2008-09, without any of the safety concerns associated with football; soccer, on the other hand, has seen an 11 percent rise since ’08-09 despite growing awareness of the threat of concussion in that sport.
The NFHSA’s data doesn’t provide demographic or economic breakdowns of the schools that participate in football, and the raw numbers don’t factor in geography below the state level. In fact, for many states—specifically those in the South, an incubator of talent where tradition is strong—high school football is on the rise. Alabama has added 9,185 players since 2008. Louisiana is up 7,988, Oklahoma 3,657 and Texas 3,105.
That offsets the Midwest. Ohio is down 12,797 players since 2008, Wisconsin is minus 4,565, Illinois 4,060, Missouri 2,342, Minnesota 2,224 and Iowa 2,190. The MMQB talked to administrators of athletic associations in states from every U.S. region. All agree that safety concerns are one reason for football’s decline, along with the rise of specialization among young players and expanding offerings of sports (hello, varsity badminton).
But each state has a distinctive personality and set of nuances. Ohio, for example, has a pay-to-participate policy in some districts, where students are charged anywhere from $50 to $600 per co-curricular activity. “Is that discouraging young people from signing up?” asks Ohio state senator Cliff Hite, who coached high school football for 22 years. “We’re trying to find that out.” Hite is hosting a series of public forums on youth sports this month, touching on how the state’s pay-for-play policy affects participation, as well as on health issues such as sudden cardiac arrest and concussions in youth sports.
It’s clear that safety and participation are the two most pressing topics in high school football. The paradox is that most experts acknowledge that football is safer today than it has ever been. While its putative risks are not necessarily as closely linked to waning interest as is sometimes asserted, in a climate of heightened and, at times, neurotic awareness, they must be addressed for the sport to survive.

* * *
The suburbs south of Phoenix are bulging, and the schools there are adding students faster than the districts can cram desks into classrooms. This summer the Chandler Unified School District opened a new high school. The board wanted a setting that was not too big, but still offered everything. Administrators would provide as many sports as they could—22 in total. One of the first items on the agenda was the hiring of a football coach. The school tabbed a 29-year-old named Spencer Stowers from nearby Mesa Westwood High. “We never thought about not having football,” Thomas Dunn, the new assistant principal and athletic director of Casteel High said. “If the appetite is there, we want our kids to be able to play.”
The appetite was definitely there. The school didn’t yet technically own the property on which it was being constructed, and the football field barely had spades in the ground, but in April, Stowers began sending out fliers for football clinics to the local middle schools. At July tryouts, 55 boys showed up, all rising ninth graders.
“When you build a school, you’re trying to build a community. We never thought about not having football.”
Casteel opened this fall for freshman only, a total of 255 students. The school will have sophomores and freshmen next year, then graduate to three grades in 2017 and be at full capacity of around 1,200 students in 2018.
Stowers’ team competed in a freshman schedule this fall. With no home field, the Colts played some games at a sister high school in the district and the rest strictly on the road. Each time, fans filled the away stands, sometimes outnumbering the home crowd. The team hosted a veterans appreciation banquet and manned a Goodwill drive for the community.
For its last game, Casteel played on its half-constructed field. The district brought in portable bleachers that seat 950. They were overflowing. “When you build a school, you’re trying to build a community,” Dunn, the assistant principal and athletic director, said. “Our football team set that tone. It brought people together. It brought us a sense of spirit. It brought camaraderie for our students, our parents, our neighbors.”
If you need to be reminded of the good in high football, think of a place like Casteel. Think of why so many coaches carve out a career in high school football.  Hint: It’s not about the money. “I honestly believe that being a high school football coach is the most important job in this country right now,” said Matt Birk, the former NFL center who now works in the league office as the director of football development. Birk’s mandate is broad (and his language a bit hyperbolic), but spend an hour with him and you’ll see his passion for preserving the high school game. Throughout the year he zig-zags across the country speaking to high school coaches, meeting with experts on safety and keeping up with trends in the game.
Although Birk views high school football through rose-tinted glasses—each week his inbox is flooded with feel-good stories, like the one about a high school coach in Minnesota who required his players to sing One Direction’s “That’s What Makes You Beautiful” in an appreciation of their mothers—he understands the landscape. Although football remains by far the most popular high school sport in the country, the recent decline comes in an environment in which America’s passion for the NFL remains unwavering. (Over the past decade, average viewership of NFL games on broadcast TV has risen by 25%, and last year was the second-most watched NFL season ever, after 2010.) In addition, the overall decline in high school football comes after a period of continuous growth—between 1998 and 2008, high school football nationwide went from 886,840 players to 1,112,303.  
“Right now the game is under attack,” Birk said. “Part of it is our own doing, part of it is things outside of our control. That just means we have to work as hard as we can to make the game as good as it can be. As safe as it can be, as positive an experience as it can be. So how is that a bad thing?”
* * *
The problem with Newbury High—the Northeast Ohio program forced to shut down midseason—is that there is not one particular problem. Rather, the school did everything right. First understand the environment in which the school operates.
The school itself occupies a two-building campus that houses kindergarten through 12th grade. Some of the grades are as small as 25 students; the largest is around 50. Newbury does what it can in athletics considering its size: There is no girls’ soccer team, but three girls play on the boys’ team (and they do play). Some of the football players are also in the band, as are two cheerleaders. They preform halftime in their uniforms.
“Ohio is a hotbed for football, and in some ways football is the identity of a school,” Chaffee, the principal, said. “Think—football brings a band, cheerleaders, a meeting place for the community on Friday nights. Yes, we are small, but if it’s important to our students, we’ll try to make it happen. Our kids want football.”
But for the last five years, because of its size, Newbury has not fielded a middle-school team. That eventually affected football at the high school level. In August, 20 boys tried out for varsity. Three quit for various reasons, and the Black Knights began the season with 17 players—only one a senior and a handful who were brand-new to organized football. What’s more, two of the freshmen are so small that coaches hesitated to play them in a varsity game against more physical competition, and another two players have autism. Gladowski said those latter two are wonderful teammates, but from a safety perspective he would not feel comfortable putting them in certain games.
“Yes, we are small, but if it’s important to our students, we’ll try to make it happen. Our kids want football.”
In being inclusionary and trying to make its small roster work, Newbury demonstrated creativity. The offense ran the Wing-T. Situational drills were often shrunk to become micro-specific. (“Right side of the defensive line versus left side of the offensive line!”) There was no scout team, and Gladowski often scrimmaged himself as the opposing quarterback. (“Hey, you’re never going to face anyone as good as me!” the coach often joked with his players).
For seven weeks the Black Knights were able to get by, even though by the third quarter of each game the players, all of whom played both ways, were gassed. “They know they’re a small team, and they’re used to it,” Forfia, the athletic director said. “But they want to fight and keep playing. In that eighth game, safetywise, it just wasn’t going to happen.”
Of the five players who succumbed to injury in the game against Lutheran East, only one was possibly concussion-related. One player had a shoulder injury, three hurt their legs and the last had a back ailment. The fact that the Black Knights lasted seven weeks is something of a miracle.
Newbury is one of three Ohio schools that canceled its season midway through the year, according to Beau Rugg, the assistant commissioner of the Ohio High School Athletic Association. Four Los Angeles-area schools also nixed remaining games, and The MMQB found cases in Maine, New York, Wisconsin and Minnesota as well. Each school either did not have enough players try out, or saw its roster depleted as the season went on.
There are two possible solutions to depleted football rosters. One is to consolidate a smaller program like Newbury with another school. In Ohio, Rugg said, that has happened with wrestling (consider that a 135-pounder can’t even practice if his teammates are all in the 185-pound weight class). However, the size of football rosters can make this measure costly or unfeasible. Also, at places such as Newbury, where the closest opponent is a 45-minute bus ride away, it may be impractical.
Another option is to play a different kind of football. The OHSAA currently has a committee exploring possibilities with eight-man football (which is offered in 18 states, all of them west of the Mississippi). Said Rugg: “There’s a changing dynamic in this country, no doubt about it.”

* * *
Watershed NFL moments such as the players’ concussion lawsuit and Chris Borland’s proactive retirement have seeped to the sidelines of high school football, becoming at the very least the subject of chatter among concerned parents.
But other elements that are trickling down to high school from the NFL, many believe, will make the sport safer at the youth level. One example is the banning of crown-of-the-helmet hits, which NFL players and other critics said would make the game “soft.” Birk was a league-and-union-appointed appeals officer during the first season of the rule, 2013. He saw first-hand how difficult it was for players to adopt the change—many said those type of hits were practically instinctive because that’s what they were taught—but over time he witnessed how their behavior changed. “By the end of that season you could literally see players trying to pull back,” Birk said, “and that was amazing.”
Said Rugg, the Ohio administrator who serves on the national rules committee: “Once you see something at a higher level, it takes time to filter down, but it does. The techniques and tackling that people are adhering to now, it helps if it’s reinforced at the NFL level.”
The second example is the attitude towards concussion. “Look at Luke Kuechly,” Birk said. “Ten, 20 years ago, how many coaches or fans would have accepted that the star linebacker of an undefeated football team should sit out three games to get his head right? Hopefully that attitude is setting the tone.”
With USA Football’s Heads Up initiative in its third year promoting educational programs for coaches, and equipment manufacturers in a race to build and sell ever-safer equipment (whether they’re overselling is another question), high school football does appear to be in a better place regarding health and safety.

However, not every NFL initiative correlates to the youth level, and the league’s resources far exceed those of high schools. For example, Blake, the California administrator, revealed a troubling statistic in his state: Only 19 percent of athletic programs have access to a trainer every day. “I think the most important thing moving forward with high school football is that we listen to science,” Blake said. “We listen to research and we move swiftly. It has been a tragic year with eight deaths. And although many might say that this is down from how many football-related deaths there were 10, 20 years ago, if that player is a player in your community, or your son, one is too many. But we can’t act emotionally. That’s not the answer.”
Back at Newbury High, it is a week after the cancellation of Lutheran East and emotions are less raw, more measured. While the reality of the football season’s early ending has been accepted, there is no talk of disbanding the program for next season. Outside Principal Chaffee’s window, the soccer team has poured on to the football field for practice. “It’s nice for a school to have a football team,” he said. “I’m not willing to say it’s a necessity, but if kids want to play, it’s our job as adults to figure out a way to help them do that.”


When Roberto Luongo calls on Friday afternoon, he's sitting on the cold bleachers of an ice rink, watching his 7-year-old son's hockey practice. It's easy to become distracted by professional athletes' cool jobs and just as easy to forget that they are members of their communities too. Luongo is the Florida Panthers' starting goalie. But he's also a hockey dad who lives in Parkland, Florida. He goes grocery shopping. He shuttles his kids to school. His family goes to church.
When the unthinkable happened in Luongo's hometown on Feb. 14 -- a gunman opened fire at Parkland's Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, killing 17 people -- the goaltender reeled. Before the Panthers' first home game after the shooting, Luongo delivered a pregame speech at the BB&T Center, declaring "it's time for us as a community to take action" and "enough is enough."Editor's PicksLuongo pays somber tribute to Parkland victimsThe Florida Panthers honored the victims of last week's shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School during Thursday night's game against the Washington Capitals.Marjory Stoneman Douglas hockey team members are the best players in the world of the weekNathan MacKinnon, Ryan Poehling and Maxime Comtois all excelled during the past several days, but the most noteworthy recent performance in the hockey world was what a high school team from South Florida was able to accomplish after a tragedy.Douglas hockey team visits Panthers, lifts CupMarjory Stoneman Douglas' hockey team was welcomed on Monday at the Florida Panthers' arena, where members of the team practiced and got a chance to lift the Stanley Cup.2 Related
The Florida Panthers honored the victims of last week's shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School during Thursday night's game against the Washington Capitals.
Nathan MacKinnon, Ryan Poehling and Maxime Comtois all excelled during the past several days, but the most noteworthy recent performance in the hockey world was what a high school team from South Florida was able to accomplish after a tragedy.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas' hockey team was welcomed on Monday at the Florida Panthers' arena, where members of the team practiced and got a chance to lift the Stanley Cup.
Two weeks have passed, and Luongo has another message.
"We need to keep talking about this," he said. "I want the [high school students] to keep fighting. And I want everyone to pay attention. As we all know, it's not front-page news anymore. People in the media have moved on to other stuff. But it's important to keep it in the forefront. It's always going to be there. We just need to keep the dialogue going."
Luongo has lived in Parkland since his first stint with the Panthers in 2000 and met his wife, Gina, there. Every morning since Valentine's Day, they've had to talk to their two children about the tragedy. Over breakfast the kids ask, "What if this happens to us?" Last Thursday, Luongo's 9-year-old daughter told him she didn't want to go to school because she "had a bad feeling" in her stomach. Gina took their daughter to Friday morning mass and at one point, a siren blared outside. "Right away, my daughter jumped up and was looking around," Luongo said. "It's not normal for children to have that feeling. The one thing I want is for my kids to feel safe at school. That's what it's all about, right? I don't care how it gets done; it needs to get done."
Luongo had no idea that his speech would have such an impact. He has accepted awards before at banquets and has addressed teams in locker rooms. But he had never spoken in front of 15,000 people in an arena -- let alone had his words amplified by national media coverage.
"The thing is, when I was in high school and elementary school, I was the worst at orals," Luongo said. "I couldn't talk. If I had to memorize stuff and then say it as I wrote it, it never came out right."
So Luongo gave himself three talking points he wanted to address, then took the ice without a script. "I wanted it to feel natural," he said.
Since then, the Panthers have forged a bond with the hockey team at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. After that game against the Capitals, the high school team visited the Panthers' locker room. They took photos, asked for autographs and just talked hockey.After the Stoneman Douglas hockey team capped its run with a win in the Statewide Amateur Hockey of Florida tournament, the players celebrated with the Stanley Cup -- and Panthers executive Shawn Thornton, a two-time Cup winner -- at the BB&T Center. Eliot J. Schechter/NHLI via Getty Images
"It was days after [the shootings] happened, and I was surprised by how strong the kids were," Luongo said. "They were able to have normal interactions. I'd be a mess if I were them."
Three days later, fourth-seeded Stoneman Douglas staved off elimination in the state tournament by upsetting the top-seeded team, then won again for a state championship.
"We were super-jacked to see them win that championship. How they put together that performance is amazing," Luongo said. "It's really inspiring to see the strength you can gather from something like that and turn it into something positive."
When Luongo and I spoke on Friday, Florida Gov. Rick Scott had just signed a bill that imposed a 21-year-old legal age requirement and three-day waiting period on gun purchases and opened the door for some school employees to be armed.
Luongo, 38, has no qualms about speaking out. After all, he engineers one of the NHL's most candid Twitter accounts, @Strombone1. He has been careful not to say anything too divisive, however.
"I didn't want to get too political," he said. "That wasn't what it was about at the time. I wanted to get my message across. That wasn't the purpose. At the same time, something needs to be done. The bill, that's a huge step in the right direction. Hopefully there will be more in the future. The focus needs to be keeping our kids safe."
Luongo says he intends to stay involved with the issue. But as the Panthers gear up for a playoff run with a hectic schedule -- they will play a whopping 17 games in March -- he knows he can't give it his full focus now. "In the offseason, when I have a little more time, we'll see where it goes," he said.
He has already made an impact in the town.
"I've been to the grocery store a bunch of times [since the shooting]. It's right by the high school," Luongo said. "A lot of the parents whose kids come to the school, they come up and thank me."
Luongo smiles and says thanks but feels a tad sheepish. "I just said a few words," he said "It's nothing compared to the strength their own kids are showing."

Team USA star Hilary Knight is heading to Canada.
Fresh off a gold medal in the 2018 Olympics, the 28-year-old forward signed a contract with Montreal and will join the defending Canadian Women's Hockey League champion Les Canadiennes for their playoff run. Details of the deal were not announced.
Knight was drafted fourth overall by the Boston Blades in the 2012 CWHL Draft. In 2013, she became the first American-born player to win the CWHL's Most Valuable Player award. In three seasons with the Blades, she won two Clarkson Cups and posted 29 goals and 33 assists in 41 regular-season games. In 2015, she joined the Boston Pride of the NWHL, which is based in the United States.
"I'm very excited for this opportunity to get back on the ice and to play in Montreal in front of Fabs fans," Knight said in a Les Canadiennes news release. "It's always an honour to be able to promote women's hockey, and my goal is to help Montreal defend their title as Clarkson Cup Champions."
The team said Knight is expected to practice with the team on Thursday, and is scheduled to make her debut on Sunday in a game against Calgary.
Knight is the third American free agent to join the CWHL mid-season, joining Alex Carpenter and Megan Bozek. All three players competed in the NWHL last season. There have been calls for the two leagues to merge.
"The biggest challenge [in promoting women's hockey] right now is having two separate leagues with Canada and the U.S.," American Amanda Kessel told ESPN in February, shortly before the Olympics. "Maybe if we combined to one league and had six to eight teams, keep it small to start. It would be super, super-talented. To go get both countries on board? It would be great entertainment."
NHL commissioner Gary Bettman addressed the matter recently. "We are going to let the landscape sort itself out," he told reporters. "If those two leagues didn't exist, we would probably start our own women's league to work in conjunction with our existing clubs."

The 2018 NHL trade deadline featured a number of high-profile deals -- and some surprising non-moves. Our team of reporters kept track of what went down between clubs throughout the day.
More: Trade tracker | Trade Grades  | Fantasy spin  | Winners & Losers | Prospects

Official numbers on NHL trade Deadline Day: Clubs made 18 trades involving 37 players today prior to the 3 ET deadline.In the 5 seasons prior to this one, an average of 20 trades, involving 36 players, were made on Deadline Day.
The trade deadline has passed and a few notable players were not moved. Erik Karlsson stays with the Senators (for now) but don't be surprised if he's traded at some point this summer. Mike Hoffman and Zack Smith also stay in Ottawa. The Red Wings couldn't find a partner for Mike Green, one of the best defenseman available. He'll likely walk in free agency. Jack Johnson stays in Columbus, even after the Blue Jackets acquired Ian Cole. and then there's Montreal. Alex Galchenyuk is still a Canadien after receiving a lot of interest, and the Habs also keep captain Max Pacioretty around. Like Karlsson, the Pacioretty situation is one to monitor - especially if trade rumors have soured the relationship between the player and the team.
 2:59 p.m. ET: The New Jersey Devils have acquired forward Patrick Maroon from the Edmonton Oilers in exchange for a 2018 third-round draft pick and prospect J.D. Dudek.
 2:59 p.m. ET: The Tampa Bay Lightning have acquired Ryan McDonagh and J.T. Miller from the New York Rangers in exchange for forward Vladislav Namestnikov, forward Brett Howden, defenseman Libor Hajek, a 2018 first-round pick and a conditional second-round pick.
Grades: Rangers, Lightning both win big in McDonagh blockbuster 
That's a pretty solid haul for NYR. TB has a deeeep prospect pool. I like Hajek and Howden a lot (a lot, a lot), but it doesn't empty the cupboard for what they got. Fascinating deal. https://t.co/sHe5ekEyT9
 2:59 p.m. ET: The Vegas Golden Knights have acquired forward Tomas Tatar from the Detroit Red Wings in exchange for a 2018 first-round pick, a 2019 second-round pick and a 2021 third-round pick.
Grades: Red Wings jump-start rebuild with Tatar trade 
The TSN TradeCentre crew breaks down Vegas' addition of forward Tomas Tatar from the Red Wings.
Erik Karlsson is staying in Ottawa. For now. The Senators were deep into talks with the Vegas Golden Knights on Karlsson but no deal was made before the deadline. So this drama extends into the summer, where the field could open up beyond the deadline suitors.
 2:48 p.m. ET: The Columbus Blue Jackets have acquired Thomas Vanek from the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for Tyler Motte and Jussi Jokinen.
Grades: Blue Jackets best Canucks in Vanek swap 
This Thomas Vanek trade involves two of the most well-traveled forwards in recent NHL history. The Blue Jackets will be Vanek's 8th team since the start of the 2013-14 season: Sabres, Islanders, Canadiens, Wild, Red Wings, Panthers, Canucks and now the Blue Jackets. Jussi Jokinen, meanwhile, has played for Pittsburgh, Florida, Edmonton, Los Angeles, Columbus and now Vancouver in that span.
 2:10 p.m. ET: The San Jose Sharks have acquired pending unrestricted free agent Evander Kane from the Buffalo Sabres. The Sabres will receive a conditional first-round pick in 2019, a conditional fourth-round pick in 2020 and center Danny O'Regan.
Grades: Sharks get Kane for bargain price 
The TSN TradeCentre crew breaks down what the Sharks get in acquiring Evander Kane from the Sabres.
 1:48 p.m. ET: Vancouver Canucks have acquired forward Brendan Leipsic from Vegas Golden Knights in exchange for defenseman Philip Holm.
 12:15 p.m. ET: The Winnipeg Jets have acquired Paul Stastny from the St. Louis Blues. St. Louis gets a 2018 first-round pick, a 2020 fourth-round pick and prospect Erik Foley.
Grades: Stastny deal a big win for Jets 
Paul Stastny joins "TradeCentre" to discuss being traded from the Blues to the Winnipeg Jets.
Hey @StLouisBlues fans, you got Erik Foley (of Providence College) in that @PaulyWalnuts26 trade with @NHLJets. He's a Bull in a China shop. Takes it to net and can't be stopped. Can score from outside tops of circles with release. Great hands. pic.twitter.com/ONR8CXfWxU
 12:02 p.m. ET: The Nashville Predators have acquired RW Ryan Hartman and a 2018 fifth-round pick from the Chicago Blackhawks. Chicago gets a 2018 first-round pick, a 2018 fourth-round pick and F Victor Ejdsell.
Grades: Blackhawks get big haul trading Hartman to Predators 
The #Blackhawks have done a ton of line shuffling this year, but Ryan Hartman's points per 60 min rate at 5-on-5 is 1.95, actually higher than Jonathan Toews (1.86) this season. (per @VinMasi)
Ottawa Sun reporter Bruce Garrioch discusses the difficult situation the Senators organization is facing with 2-time Norris Trophy winner Erik Karlsson.
 9:32 a.m. ET: The Columbus Blue Jackets have acquired defenseman Ian Cole from the Ottawa Senators. The Senators get center Nick Moutrey and a 2020 third-round pick.
Grades: Blue Jackets hit home run in landing Cole 
Man, the Senators are really in money-saving mode. They didn't even have Ian Cole fly to Ottawa after he was traded.
From the last 10 seasons, my All-NHL Trade Deadline Team: LW Ilya Kovalchuk (Thrashers to Devils, 2010); C Jeff Carter (Blue Jackets to Kings, 2012); RW Marian Hossa (Thrashers to Penguins, 2008); D Brian Campbell (Sabres to Sharks, 2008); D Jay Bouwmeester (Flames to Blues, 2013); G Roberto Luongo (Canucks to Panthers, 2014). Thought about Kevin Shattenkirk on defense, Marty St. Louis at wing, Filip Forsberg at center and Ben Bishop at goalie. But these are my guys.
The Columbus Blue Jackets are going to be active for a forward today. According to Mark Lazerus of the Sun-Times, they offered a third-round pick to the Chicago Blackhawks to reacquire center Artem Anisimov, but were denied. The Hawks approached the 29-year-old center to waive his no-move clause. He makes $4.55 million through 2021, but expect a move this summer as his NMC becomes a no-trade clause on July 1.

 9:32 a.m. ET: The Boston Bruins have acquired LW Rick Nash from the New York Rangers. New York gets a 2018 first-round pick, C Ryan Spooner, LW Matt Beleskey, D Ryan Lindgren and a 2019 seventh-round pick.
Grades: Bruins earn a B; Rangers get a B+ 
"When they first asked me [for my list], I wasn't going to hold them hostage or anything like that. But I wanted to go to a place that wanted me and that had a great chance to win, and I think Boston fits those two things perfectly." – Rick Nash on his trade to the Boston Bruins, whom he said were atop the trade list he handed the NY Rangers. He was in the lineup for the Bruins on Sunday against Buffalo, on a line with Jake DeBrusk and David Krejci.
A little sampling of new NY Rangers prospect Ryan Lindgren's skillset. Smart, physical defenseman who takes care of his own zone well. Not a ton of offensive skill but mobile enough. Also, he loves to hit. https://t.co/N9FrVKFWPx
If the playoffs started today, the St. Louis Blues wouldn't be in them. They're one point out of the wild card and losers of six straight games, including Sunday's 4-0 loss to the Nashville Predators, the second straight game in which they failed to score a goal. Goalie Jake Allen, who was mocked by Blues fans in a loss on Friday, is now 2-13-0 in his last 15 starts. The Blues are averaging 1.16 goals per game in their last seven. Trade deadline panic time? The Blues have been mentioned as a possible destination for both Edmonton's Patrick Maroon and Montreal star Max Pacioretty, whom Elliotte Friedman of Sportsnet reported "wanted out."

 5:54 p.m. ET: The Pittsburgh Penguins acquired center Derick Brassard from Ottawa in a three-team deal that sent defenseman Ian Cole to Ottawa and forward Ryan Reaves to the Vegas Golden Knights.
Grades: Penguins earn high marks for Brassard deal; Vegas gets an incomplete 
The Brassard trade ... just another reason Jim Rutherford is a Top Tier general managers. (If you haven't seen our NHL GM rankings, get'em here) https://t.co/qkX2NVVILl
Derrick Brassard is signed through next year, hence the first round pick. He is a pretty good playoff performer, essentially a 20 goal scorer. #penguins going for threepeat. Even @steelers haven't done that. pic.twitter.com/IZb2OnD6qQ

 3:02 p.m. ET: The New York Rangers have traded leading scorer Michael Grabner to the New Jersey Devils. New Jersey shipped defenseman prospect Yegor Rykov and a second-round pick in this year's draft to New York.
Grades: Rangers earn an A-, Devils get B+ for Grabner deal 
More: Tracker | Trade Grades  

DULUTH, Ga. — One hour until show time, and the backstage area is frenzied mess. Inside a fluorescent-lit dressing room, nearly two dozen women are running around in skimpy clothing and working through a steady mist of hairspray as they fight over bottles of lotion, nail polish, rounded hairbrushes, eye shadow pallets and a seemingly endless supply of glitter.
“S---!” a woman shouts, darting from the bathroom. “I just f----- up my makeup.”
“Can someone see if my eyes are even on both sides?” asks another, talking to nobody in particular.
“My hair is just not agreeing with me today!”
In a far corner, two women pirouette like ballerinas while a thick layer of tanning spray is applied to their exposed legs. Once dolled up, the women search for a moment of calm. One has wrapped herself in a fleece blanket and fallen asleep despite Nicki Minaj’s “Super Bass” pulsating through the kind of speakers you might find at an outdoor concert.
The music stops abruptly when a man in a tight-fitting red polo bursts in, his drill-sergeant voice picking up where the speakers cut out.
“Ladies, line up for walkthroughs.”
The women barely flinch.
“Now!” he barks.
Purses are stowed, bottles are capped and the women congregate by the door. But first, someone reaches for a pink bottle of perfume. “This is the secret,” she says, spritzing her neck and wrists. “Gotta feel pretty before we get ugly.”

“Ladies,” he says, his eyes glowering. “You’re walking out there to your place of business. This is your office. What type of team do you want to be tonight? Step out onto this field with the right mentality. Be precise, be exact, be fierce, be malicious.
“And,” he says, letting out a little grin, “be classy.”

If only people saw her for who she really is: a football player taking the field.
* * *
As young as 20 and as old as 37, the women on Atlanta’s roster work in professions as varied as engineering, sales and the military. It’s an incongruous crew of 20 that would likely never mingle if not for football, which some say feels like a full-time job but is treated as a glorified hobby. LFL players aren’t paid (in fact, they pay an annual $45 registration fee to play), nor are they provided any medical coverage by the league—two issues that have led to ongoing lawsuits.
The season runs from April to August, during which time players on the Atlanta Steam put in about 20 hours of practice and film study a week. Games are sometimes played on consecutive weekends, other times with two months in between. Teams can only take 10 players to away games, but more players often travel with the Steam, meaning the extras pay their own way. Three Steam players who live in Florida often drive seven hours to play home games in Atlanta.
“These girls work so hard,” says Robinson, who is paid by the LFL based on wins and losses (he declined to say how much for each.) A former defensive end at University of Buffalo and onetime Arena League coach, Robinson puts that money and then some back into his team, renting out a practice space in suburban Atlanta and holding a year-end banquet, because, he says, his players “deserve the full experience.”
“This is the secret,” one woman says, spritzing her neck and wrists with perfume. “Gotta feel pretty before we get ugly.”
Two days before their rematch with the Omaha Heart, Steam players have convened at a nondescript industrial complex in suburban Atlanta to review last week’s game. Though they don’t wear thigh pads, hip pads, tailbone pads or much clothing, these women play full-contact, seven-on-seven football on a 50-by-30-yard field inside hockey-style walls. They wear only shoulder pads and a helmet, with a clear mask that doesn’t obscure their faces. The Steam’s playbook is an 18-page binder featuring 108 plays; the players read defenses and call audibles; they utilize several formations on both sides of the ball; they run passing routes on par with top-tier high school programs. Their coach, a personal trainer who treats none of it like a hobby, isn’t letting any mistakes go unnoticed despite the previous week’s blowout.
“Pause there,” Robinson says. “Dakota, look at those linemen. What are they doing?”
“They’re all pulling,” the quarterback says.
“And what are you doing?”
“Not adjusting, coach.”
“Exactly! We can’t have tunnel vision. Maybe there’s a deep ball there, maybe not. But you can’t tell if you’re not aware of what is going on.”
As Robinson rolls the footage on a large projector, the door swings open and a cop with a buzz cut saunters into the room. She’s short and stocky and oozing attitude. Everyone remains quiet as she unhooks her holster, drops it on the cold rubber floor and then sits on it. “My job is stressful, it’s hard, it eats at you,” says Nas Johnson, Atlanta’s running back and a patrol officer in the city’s police department. “There are so many guys on the force who can’t cope with that. They resort to alcoholism or depression or something destructive. For me, when I get to go out here and hit somebody, that’s my outlet and the way I can keep sane.”
At one point during the film session, a teenage boy pokes his head into the room. “Hey,” he says, “we’ve got some guys out here who want to scrimmage. What do you say?”
“Oh, please,” scoffs one player.
“Trust me,” Hughes says. “You don’t want to.”
The challenge is loaded with disrespect, as if the team is a novelty act played by women who wear barely more than strippers. In reality, the boys would hardly stand a chance against the likes of LeAnn Hardin, a 27-year-old who spent eight and a half years doing logistics for a special ops unit in the Air Force. After her latest tour in the Middle East, she returned to find her husband plopped on the couch watching an LFL game on TV. “If those girls can do that,” she told herself, “I sure as hell can.” A self-described tomboy with an intimidating physique, Hardin felt self-conscious as more than 400 hopefuls pranced around in bikinis during tryouts. Yet making the team in 2012 was a transformative moment. “For the first time in my life,” she says. “I felt confident in my own skin.”
Ah, yes, the skin. It’s what all LFL players must grapple with: Either you show it, or you won’t be seen at all.
* * *
Last spring, a friend asked receiver Jody Nettles if she would visit her daughter’s Brownies troop in Atlanta so the 7-year-olds could earn a “Fair Play” badge by speaking to a professional athlete.
“Is it OK if they know what we wear to the games?” Nettles asked.
“Sure,” the friend said. “What the heck.”
So Nettles and a teammate showed up in regular gym clothes, screened an LFL promotional video and then spoke about the challenges and excitement of being a female football player. Immediately, the 17 Brownies began grilling them with questions.
“Why are you wearing something different than what the men wear?” one girl asked.
“Well,” Nettles said. “Sometimes you need to be a little different than the men. The most important thing is if you’re passionate.”
The truth: The LFL’s barely-there uniforms are an unmistakable marketing draw. “We understood going in that we had to have a gimmick, for lack of better term,” says Mitch Mortaza, the league’s commissioner. “And that’s sex appeal.”
Founded in 2009, the Lingerie Football League was a spinoff of the Lingerie Bowl, the one-game pay-per-view counter-programming event that was broadcast during halftime of Super Bowl 38. When its initial sponsorship partner, Dodge, backed out due to pressure from women’s groups, PartyPoker.com stepped in. At the time, Mortaza was the president of Horizon, a small production company based in L.A. that backed several reality television shows, most centered on dating. When the Lingerie Bowl took off, Mortaza pivoted his business to create an actual league.
“We wouldn’t be where we are today if we didn’t start with the lingerie moniker—that’s what drew fans in,” says Mortaza, now 41. Two years ago the Lingerie Football League became the Legends Football League, because, Mortaza says, “if we wanted longevity and to draw top players in, we needed a change.”
The rebranding began in 2013, but the promise that lingerie would be ditched in favor of “performance apparel” was a bit exaggerated—the uniforms were mostly unchanged except for the removal of lace garters. Franchises have been added and subtracted, and there are now six: Atlanta, Chicago, Omaha, Los Angeles, Seattle and Las Vegas.
“We understood going in that we had to have a gimmick, for lack of better term,” says Mitch Mortaza, the league’s commissioner. “And that’s sex appeal.”
Beyond the LFL, there’s been more progress for women in football. This summer Sarah Thomas became an NFL official and Jen Welter, the first woman to play in a men’s pro football league, was a coaching intern with the Arizona Cardinals. Women have a strong appetite for football, and not just as viewers (though 2014 data has women accounting for 45% of the NFL’s 150 million fans). Seven states now offer girls’ flag football as a varsity sport, and there are three adult women’s tackle football leagues in the U.S., with nearly 4,000 participants combined. These adult leagues are conventional 11-on-11 football, with players fully padded.
A handful of women on the Atlanta Steam, including Nettles, have played in those traditional leagues. But the tradeoff for more clothes is fewer spectators. “You get to the game, and you’re so proud and you’re ready to compete, and the crowd [size] is just sad,” she says. “You have a friend show up, and maybe your mom, and that’s it. It’s nothing like this.” Atlanta Steam players sold the LFL to Dakota Hughes by saying, “It’s the only professional women’s league that gets attention. You can play real football in front of real fans.”
Unlike other women’s football leagues, the LFL also has a television deal. The games appear on Fuse in an edited-down format a week after they’re played. But TV requires more than just bikinis to hold viewers’ attention, especially during lopsided games. Players say that Mortaza has a presence in the locker room, where he instructs them to give camera-friendly inspirational speeches, and also on the field, where multiple women say the commissioner has told them to trash-talk opponents and devise elaborate touchdown celebrations.
In 2011, the coach of the now defunct Minnesota franchise wrote an email to Mortaza listing the complaints his players had about the commissioner’s micromanaging and aggressive game-day presence. Mortaza responded via email: “the only way these girls respond is with forcefulness and stern directions.”
In a phone interview with The MMQB, Mortaza countered by saying, “Nobody has pushed the players to do those things.” He was forthright about his goals for the LFL. “We shouldn’t fault women who are athletic and also attractive,” he said. “That’s the taboo we’re trying to address. Just look at Hope Solo. She’s had her issues off the field, but she’s one of the more marketable women on [the U.S. women’s soccer] team because she’s also attractive.”
Mortaza, however, declined to discuss the ongoing legal action being taken against the LFL. He is being sued by former Las Vegas Sin player Robin Johnson, who in August 2014 filed a class-action lawsuit in federal court claiming the league wrongfully classified her and “hundreds of similarly situated employees” as independent contractors who are exempt from minimum wage and overtime compensation. Melissa Margulies, another former player, has filed a similar suit in California. She fractured bones in her cheek and near her eye socket while playing for the Los Angeles Temptation in 2013; she says the league refused to pick up any medical costs and did not offer workers compensation because it claimed she wasn’t an employee.
Dakota feared what her family would think about her playing in the LFL. Then her grandmother told her all she needed to hear: “Don’t get to my age and have regrets.”
“Look at their agreement: They have to show up for practice, they have to show up for promotional appearances, and if they don’t, they’re out,” says Michael Morrison, a Los Angeles-based attorney who is representing the plaintiffs in both cases. “All of these items show the level of control the league exercises over these players and right away, I knew this was unlawful.” (Mortaza declined to comment on the ongoing legal proceedings.)
The LFL apparently used to pay players, but stopped doing so sometime after Mortaza circulated a league memo on March 18, 2011. Obtained by The MMQB, the note read: “The moment it became clear to us that the league needed a shift in culture was following this season’s Lingerie Bowl. As the confetti was coming down and the champagne was being sprayed, a player celebrating the Lingerie Bowl victory immediately turned to a league representative and asked, ‘So when are we getting our checks?’ It was at this moment, that should have been joyous and filled with a sense of appreciation for the experience, that we realized we needed a drastic change in policy to rid our games of these players.”
On the phone, Mortaza said it would be “misleading” to say the LFL had previously paid players. He says some were given small sums for promotional events, but that opened “issues of workers’ comp and all of those other things that have bankrupted leagues before, including the Arena Football League.” He added, “Our intention is to one day go fully professional. Right now we are not financially sound enough to do that.”
Morrison says he attempted to serve Mortaza legal papers in Las Vegas, but learned the LFL offices had moved. Morrison attempted to serve Mortaza at another address in Las Vegas, and at addresses associated with Mortaza in California, with no success. He says he finally sent someone to serve Mortaza in person at an LFL tryout in Los Angeles.
According to Morrison, the commissioner was approached but denied being Mitch Mortaza despite several women identifying him as such. Morrison also says that Mortaza hasn’t showed up to any status meetings regarding the lawsuits and that a default judgment has been entered against the league that could be headed toward collection.
* * *
Perhaps the highest respect the women of the Atlanta Steam have ever received came from Jessica Pickens, the girlfriend of coach Dane Robinson.
“When Dane said he wanted to coach in this league, I was adamantly against it,” she says. “Then I came to a practice and saw that these weren’t ladies who wanted to run around in their bikinis, but actual athletes. Not only that, they are women doing what they need to do to make it in a male-dominated world. You can’t fault them for that.”
Away from the field, Dakota Hughes looks nothing the hard-charging quarterback who spikes balls after touchdowns and gets in defenders’ faces for bouts of exaggerated taunting. On the manicured campus of Kennesaw State University, about a 40-minute drive north of Atlanta, she blends into the crowd of students lugging textbooks across the quad—just another 19-year-old college student. Hughes still lives at home; she doesn’t drink; she doesn’t smoke. When she went to Cancun for spring break, her 75-year-old grandmother went with her.
Like many of her teammates, Hughes has always been a gifted athlete. After her parents divorced when she was 3, she spent weekends playing catch with her dad, breaking indoor lamps before practices were moved outside. By the second grade she was the starting shortstop on a boys’ baseball team. Then Mark Hughes handed his daughter a football, and she was hooked. In high school she began drawing up plays every December for the annual powder-puff game . . . in May.
“Do I want my college-aged daughter to feel uncomfortable about the fact she has an A cup?” Hughes’ mother says. “As much as I don’t want my daughter being displayed like this, I see how much good it does for her.”
When she enrolled at Kennesaw, Hughes scouted out all the intramural football teams and was struck by one roster: The team photo featured a girl in full pads and a helmet. That player was a senior who also played wide receiver for the Atlanta Steam. She pleaded for Hughes to join the Steam, but Dakota feared what her family would think. Then her grandmother, Kim, told her all she needed to hear: “Don’t get to my age and have regrets.”





Some of the texts were paragraphs long.
“Nobody has ever stood up for me like that,” Hughes says. “I broke down and cried.”
Mortaza declined to comment on specific conversations with players, but said, “Yes, the women’s looks are what’s marketable. None of our sponsors have pushed us to impose any actions on how a player acts or looks, nor have we imposed any of those things.” Hughes said the league never followed up, and that she hasn’t heard anything from Mortaza regarding her appearance since her rookie season.
As raunchy as the LFL is advertised or perceived, the Gwinnett Center offers a family-friendly atmosphere. Beers are $4 a pour, but this isn’t just a bachelor-party destination. During the rematch against the Omaha Heat, the loudspeakers blare Maroon 5 and Taylor Swift between plays; there are hundreds of women and children in the stands, with average attendance around 4,000. Among them are Hughes’ mother and grandmother, as well as nearly three dozen family members, friends and (predominantly female) coworkers of Dakota’s grandmother.
Hughes’ mother, Traci, sits about 100 yards above the home bench. She has Dakota’s almond-shaped eyes and broad smile, but their personalities couldn’t be more different. While her daughter is shy, Traci loves to chat. Dakota insisted on wearing Converse sneakers to her eighth-grade formal, but mom is a jewelry designer who went to the Art Institute of Atlanta. She feels the need to protect her daughter in a way that has nothing to do with pass rushers trying to crush her.
“Do I want my college-aged daughter to feel uncomfortable about the fact she has an A cup?” Traci says. “Of course not. As much as I don’t want my daughter being displayed like this, I see how much good it does for her. How she feels a part of a sorority, a group of strong, independent women who have helped her mature into a strong independent woman herself.”
Traci suddenly straightens up in her seat. “Oh, and you have to come to the meet-and-greet after,” she says. “There’s nothing like seeing your 19-year-old daughter sign a baby.”
Though Robinson feared his players would look past Omaha to next week’s showdown against the first-place Chicago Bliss, the Steam hold a four-touchdown lead by halftime and win, 62-0.
* * *
Atlanta would go on to finish the regular season 3-2, placing second in the three-team division. Hughes completed 59.2% of her throws for 585 yards and 17 touchdowns in the regular season. (Opposing quarterbacks, by comparison, completed only 37.5% for 102 yards and three TDs against the Steam.) “She’s one of the best natural athletes I’ve ever been around,” says Nettles, a former pole-vaulter at Georgia.
In mid-August the Steam traveled to Chicago to face the Bliss in the Eastern Conference finals. For the first time all season, Hughes was kept out of the end zone. The result: a devastating 41-6 loss. As the game slogged on, shock turned into somberness on the bench. Robinson even put Hughes in at wideout in the fourth quarter to remind his players that they should be having fun. Afterward, Hughes gathered her teammates in a huddle. “I love all of you,” she said.
Was it a final goodbye? Hughes had been keeping a secret all season. Part of her just wanted to live a normal college life and step away from the LFL, and this might have been her last game. But a week later, back at Kennesaw State for her junior year, something just didn’t feel right. After class, she called up her quarterback coach. “Hey,” she said. “Has the league sent you the game tape yet?”
“Just got it.”
Hughes drove straight to his house, where they dissected film of the season-ending loss for two hours. She still couldn’t get over one throw she made in the first quarter. The Steam trailed only 7-0, and her receiver executed a perfect post route in the end zone. But Hughes missed the throw long.
“I had her,” she says. “Next year, I won’t make the same mistakes.”

 

SPORTS ILLUSTRATED photographer Jed Jacobsohn arrived at the Coliseum in Oakland on Sunday to work on two SI feature stories—one on Raiders quarterback Terrelle Pryor, one on Eagles coach Chip Kelly. So for most of the the first half of the game between the Raiders and the Eagles, Jacobsohn focused on his subjects. He maneuvered around the field, capturing nuances and reactions that could help tell their larger story.
“I even spent time shooting those big play cards the Eagles hold up, of cheesesteaks and Rocky Balboa,” Jacobsohn said.
In the meantime, second-year Eagles quarterback Nick Foles, starting in place of the injured Michael Vick, was throwing a lot of touchdowns. Jacobsohn captured most of the scoring action in the course of his game shooting and knew that Philly’s quarterback was having an improbably good day. He didn’t realize how good, though, until Foles’s sixth touchdown pass, in the third quarter. Another photographer alerted Jacobsohn on the sidelines, explaining that Foles—yes, Michael Vick’s 24-year-old backup—was approaching the NFL record.
“At that moment my priority definitely changed,” Jacobsohn said. 
He needed to get the shot of touchdown number seven—and possibly eight.
Shooting at the Coliseum has always been tricky. Police stand in a row on the sideline facing the crowd, in front of where photographers can shoot, obstructing their already-limited sight lines. “It’s the only stadium that I know of that has this,” said Jacobsohn, who has been shooting the NFL since he was 16, including about eight games a year for the last 18 years.
So Jacobsohn parked himself in the end zone to capture Foles’ next strike, TD number seven, which would tie him with six other quarterbacks—Sid Luckman, Adrian Burk, George Blanda, Y.A. Tittle, Joe Kapp and Peyton Manning. He was in good position to catch Foles’ delivery on the five-yard TD pass to Riley Cooper on second-and-goal late in the third quarter, “but I wasn’t in great position to get Foles’ reaction, as I was dealing with the whole issue of covering games at Oakland,” Jacobsohn explained. 

Foles had pointed to the sky, and Jacobsohn got an OK shot, though a referee got in the way—not uncommon for any football game, just frustrating. “It was OK, though, because the shot I really wanted was the record-breaking one,” the photographer said. 
Jacobsohn liked his chances; there was still a whole quarter to play. “I shot a lot of Chip Kelly when he was at Oregon,” Jacobsohn said. “And he never had a problem running up the score.” (The Ducks' margin of victory in 2012 was about five touchdowns).
With about nine minutes remaining, though, Kelly replaced Foles with rookie Matt Barkley.  “I was shocked,” Jacobsohn said. “I couldn’t believe they took him out.” Jacobsohn focused on the sideline to capture shots of Foles reaction, and interactions with Vick. “He didn’t seem to be bothered by being sidelined,” Jacobsohn said.


Geeking out over this week's release of "The Last Jedi"? You're not alone. For this week's Power Rankings -- voted on, as always, by ESPN's panel of experts -- we channeled our love for a galaxy far, far away as well as our passion about the 2017-18 NHL season and identified a Star Wars character who best embodies each team. You can't stop change any more than you can stop the suns from setting -- although the Tampa Bay Lightning begin another week ruling the hockey universe.
How we rank: We use a panel of voters, and these rankings reflect which teams voters think would win head-to-head matchups. Higher-ranked teams are favored over lower-ranked teams. A run of wins doesn't guarantee a jump, and a couple of losses doesn't guarantee a fall.
Previous rankings: Preseason | Week 1 | Week 2 | Week 3 | Week 4 | Week 5 | Week 6 | Week 7 | Week 8 | Week 9
Record: 22-6-2
Week 9 Ranking: No. 1
Rey. The scrappy scavenger grew up alone on a desert planet (kind of like the Atlantic Division) yet finds herself drawn into a galaxy-spanning conflict. Plus, her performance is universally acclaimed.
Record: 21-9-2
Week 9 Ranking: No. 5
R2-D2. The feisty droid is the brave hero who always comes through -- hey, someone needs to knock the Blackhawks out of the playoffs every once in a while. R2-D2 helps a friend no matter what trouble (or, in the Blues' case, injuries) he or she runs into.
Record: 19-7-4
Week 9 Ranking: No. 2
Han Solo. Like Solo, the Preds are charming, rough-around-the-edges rogues. Outsiders who have proved themselves to be indispensable. Now, if they can only master the (Phil) Kessel run that they failed in the Stanley Cup Final ...
Record: 18-8-5
Week 9 Ranking: No. 3
Boba Fett. In the rise of the Galactic Empire, Boba Fett emerged as a lethal bounty hunter -- just like Winnipeg. In what was supposed to be a golden renaissance for Canadian hockey teams, the Jets have broken out as the silent assassin.
Record: 19-11-1
Week 9 Ranking: No. 9
Finn. Despite being legit championship contenders, the Blue Jackets still have their doubters. But once people get over their preconceptions -- and over themselves -- perhaps they can see how totally awesome this could be. As Finn showed, it doesn't always take a Jedi to wield a lightsaber.
Record: 20-9-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 6
Leia. She accomplished a lot when she was young. And even as she aged, Leia stayed adventurous -- as did the Kings, who have adapted to a faster style under new coach John Stevens -- but remained the same badass we all know and admire.
Record: 20-11-1
Week 9 Ranking: No. 4
Yoda. Sometimes things out of Yoda's mouth seem backward (name Auston Matthews captain already, why won't you, Lou Lamoriello?), but he speaks with wisdom and stays true to a greater plan.
Record: 19-12-1
Week 9 Ranking: No. 10
Jyn Erso. Jyn is a fearless member of the Alliance who seemingly does everything right. But she eventually dies at the end and meets her untimely demise. What could have been. Sigh.
Record: 17-9-4
Week 9 Ranking: No. 7
Ewoks. The Devils are cute and cuddly and yet so skilled when they're out in the forest. That's how we feel watching youngsters like Nico Hischier, Will Butcher and Jesper Bratt overachieve ...
From Phil Kessel turning to the dark side to Brent Burns channeling Chewbacca to C-3PO going on the power play for the Penguins, Star Wars theme nights have swept through the hockey galaxy this season.
Pittsburgh looks like a team with a lot of miles on its tires from those two Stanley Cup runs. Our writers offer ideas to help the Pens get back in gear, such as: make a trade, score more even-strength goals -- and keep passing the puck to Phil Kessel.
Players like Tavares do not hit the market every summer, and given the number of teams in the market for his services, his next deal could be well above $10 million in annual value. What do the underlying numbers say?
Record: 17-11-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 12
The Force. An ancient power, long forgotten and now returned to prominence. As mysterious and incomprehensible as Josh Bailey having more than double the points of Joe Pavelski this season.
Record: 19-9-2
Week 9 Ranking: No. 11
BB-8. The new plaything that people weren't sure was going to be successful and then totally was. And just when you think apathy is setting in, it does that adorable "thumbs-up" with its torch and you're back in droid love.
Record: 16-11-3
Week 9 ranking: No. 19
Han Solo, Frozen in Carbonite. A hero trapped in stasis, as the Wild were during their early-season injuries, but finally thawing out. Sure, he's going to stumble around until he gets his vision back, but at least he's no longer a wall treatment in Jabba's Palace.
Record: 16-12-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 13
The Millennium Falcon. Henrik Lundqvist will still make point five past lightspeed. His games might not always look like much, but he's got it where it counts, kid. (We of course mean his immaculate beard.)
Record: 16-10-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 20
.@Buccigross Brent Burns (aka: Caveman, aka: Chewbacca) #bucciovertimechallenge pic.twitter.com/0NFtB2raRf
Chewbacca. Look, sometimes they write themselves, OK?.
Record: 18-13-1
Week 9 Ranking: No. 14
The Jawas. They scoured the deserts (aka NHL free agency) for scraps to make into refurbished equipment. Unfortunately, they inevitably sell said equipment -- and hopefully that's not the case for Dallas at this year's trade deadline.
Record: 15-9-4
Week 9 Ranking: No. 22
Admiral Ackbar. He is known for only one good line: "It's a trap!" The Bruins are also known for only one good line: Brad Marchand, Patrice Bergeron and David Pastrnak.
Record: 15-11-5
Week 9 Ranking: No. 16
The Skywalker Family. Incredibly popular and a foundational team in the NHL's saga. But do they have to, like, be in everything? Maybe they tell some different stories once in a while?
Record: 16-13-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 8
Death Star. They're an unstoppable killing machine -- back-to-back Stanley Cup champs, Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin still in their prime -- but let's face it, they have significant flaws. This year, that's slow starts, depth production, 5-on-5 scoring ... need we go on?
Record: 13-11-7
Week 9 Ranking: No. 18
Bacta Tank. This is an aspirational assignment. After enduring a ridiculous number of injuries, the Ducks need to make like Luke Skywalker, put on a breathing mask and submerge themselves in this vessel of water until they are healthy.
Record: 16-12-3
Week 9 Ranking: No. 15
The Emperor's Royal Guard. They're red, like the Flames. Also, they attack with a spear, like Matthew Tkachuk.
Record: 12-11-7
Week 9 Ranking: No. 24
K-2SO. That droid from "Rogue One" that looked evil, like the Flyers do, but was also charming in its own blunt manner. Also didn't make it to the end, like the Flyers won't.
Record: 14-14-4
Week 9 Ranking: No. 17
Baby Luke and Leia. A combination of youth with unlimited potential and two magical twins.
Record: 12-11-7
Week 9 Ranking: No. 23
Sebulba. We thought they had the pod race finally figured out and would cross the finish line as a playoff team. Instead, they've spent the first two months playing like "poodoo."
Record: 13-14-4
Week 9 Ranking: No. 21
Darth Vader. We know there's still good in Vader -- just as there's still a glimmer of hope in this Canadiens team -- but on the surface, we see a masked villain corrupted by last season's moderate success.
Record: 14-14-2
Week 9 Ranking: No. 25
Lando Calrissian. Rules over a city in the clouds. Let's just hope that when Joe Sakic looks back at the Matt Duchene trade he isn't muttering "This deal is getting worse all the time ..."
Record: 13-16-2
Week 9 Ranking: No. 26
Anakin Skywalker. Ah, the Chosen One. He was supposed to bring balance to the force, just as Connor McDavid and Leon Draisaitl were supposed to be an unstoppable one-two punch. The fear of losing it all has crippled this preseason Stanley Cup contender.
Record: 12-14-5
Week 9 Ranking: No. 28
Old Obi-Wan Kenobi. Stubbornly believes in his own philosophy. Has been dormant for many, many years, waiting for A New Hope.
Record: 11-13-7
Week 9 Ranking: No. 29
Padme. She was once prestigious royalty. But after a forbidden marriage (committing to too many long-term contracts to aging players) she now finds herself on the dark side of the salary cap.
Record: 10-13-7
Week 9 Ranking: No. 27
Clumsy Stormtrooper. It feels like the Senators this season are a big lumbering giant who's just ramming into walls. Somewhere between the potential Erik Karlsson drama and fallout from the Kyle Turris/Matt Duchene trade, this team is a clumsy mess on the ice.

Can't get enough hockey? Watch out-of-market regular season games LIVE and on-demand in HD with NHL.TV. Annual, monthly, and single-team plans are available. Blackouts and restrictions apply. Learn more and subscribe to get NHL.TV today!
Record: 8-17-6
Week 9 Ranking: No. 31
Bolvan. Now, who is Bolvan? According to Wookieepedia, Bolvan was the Imperial officer who told his gunner not to fire on the escape pod that was jettisoned from the Tantive IV because there were no lifeforms on board. Had he done the opposite, then R2-D2, C-3PO and the plans for the Death Star are basically vaporized, and the entire film series ends there. So in honor of the single most inept moment in a Star Wars movie, we bestow him upon the Buffalo Sabres' season.
Record: 7-21-5
Week 9 Ranking: No. 30
The Great Pit of Carkoon. It's a big, swallowing hole in the middle of the desert, without much of an identity. You could just fall into it, and disappear ...

The Vegas Golden Knights made their regular-season home debut with a 5-2 win over Arizona on Tuesday to remain undefeated. ESPN followed along to chronicle how the team's big night unfolded.
The Vegas Golden Knights raise their sticks to the crowd after winning their home opener to remain undefeated.
The first regular season home goal in Vegas Golden Knights history is scored by Tomas Nosek.
The Arizona Coyotes were booed when they first hit the ice but quickly cheered when they lined up behind the Vegas Golden Knights and the first responders
There were 58 seconds of silence before tonight's Vegas Golden Knights game for the 58 victims of last week's mass shooting in Las Vegas.
The Vegas Golden Knights take the ice for their home opener.
Prior to tonight's home opener, the Vegas Golden Knights will honor the memories of the 58 victims with their names emblazoned on the ice.
The Vegas Golden Knights will not have advertisements on the boards tonight. Instead it's all Vegas Strong.
The Vegas Golden Knights opening night march to T-Mobile Arena.
It's temporary. We think.
The MGM Grand is putting up signs outside the hotel before the Vegas Golden Knights home opener tonight.
Vegas Golden Knights coach Gerard Gallant on the emotions of the home opener later tonight: "It's going to very tough.  It is going to be very tough for sure."
Yesterday, Golden Knights staffers did a run through of pregame ceremonies, including the plans to honor victims. It got emotional. "I got teary-eyed," coach Gerard Gallant said.
There are 58 candles and 58 white crosses next to the "Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas" sign to honor the 58 lives lost during last week's mass shooting.
This guy is ready.
Some fans have gathered to watch the Vegas Golden Knights go through practice Monday morning before Tuesday's home opener.
Vegas Golden Knights general manager George McPhee said Tuesday's home opener is "not about us; it's about honoring and remembering the victims" of last week's shooting.
Vegas Golden Knights head coach Gerard Gallant going over some instructions during practice.
Vegas Golden Knights coach Gerard Gallant on the team honoring the victims and first responders of last week's shooting before Tuesday's home opener. "It's bigger than hockey. It's a lot bigger than our game."
Fans are stopping Vegas Golden Knights players for autographs as they leave the team's training facility after practice on Monday.
The press turnout for the Vegas Golden Knights practice on Monday before their home opener on Tuesday.
Vegas Golden Knights goaltender Marc-André Fleury talking about the home opener on Tuesday.
Info about the national anthem and intermission act at the Vegas Golden Knights' home opener tomorrow night.

The NHL did not request for Vegas Golden Knights games to be removed from Nevada's legal sportsbooks, deputy commissioner Bill Daly told ESPN on Wednesday.
The league had 30 days before an event to make the official request to the Nevada Gaming Commission; the Golden Knights open their inaugural season on Oct. 6 against Dallas. The Golden Knights are currently +220 underdogs against the Dallas Stars at the Westgate SuperBook in Las Vegas.
"What we're most interested in is making sure we get equitable treatment with the NFL in terms of how teams are dealt with on the book," Daly told ESPN. "We had discussions both with the club and MGM, with respect to betting around the arena. There may be some steps done in respect to that, but we didn't feel like it was an appropriate time to make the global request."
Nevada Gaming Commission chairman Dr. Tony Alamo confirmed to ESPN on Wednesday that the NHL had not made the request to prohibit betting on Golden Knights' games at the state's regulated sportsbooks.
"Nevada is the safest place on the planet to place a bet on any sport," Alamo said. "I think the NHL sees that and appreciates that."
The Oakland Raiders of the NFL are also relocating to Vegas with a scheduled move in 2020 and will have a similar decision as the NHL.
The NHL and NFL remain plaintiffs in a legal battle over New Jersey's attempt to legalize sports betting at the state's casinos and racetracks. The case has been accepted by the Supreme Court and is expected to be heard late this year.

COEUR D'ALENE, Idaho -- In the northwest crevice of Idaho, among swaths of national forests and lakes encircled by lanky pine trees, there is only one indoor hockey rink. Until 2008, it was called the Kyro Ice Facility, part of the Kootenai Youth Recreation Organization, and was located in the resort town of Coeur d'Alene. The next closest NHL regulation-size arena was 45 minutes away, in Spokane, Washington. Then a harsh winter hit: 100 inches of snow, followed by a full week of rain. The roof of the rink collapsed in late December 2008. It closed for nearly four years.
"My two nephews used to play hockey," Jill Smith says. "They quit when they had nowhere to play nearby."
His team is Vegas' hottest attraction, but Bill Foley is gambling that the Golden Knights will resonate past the Strip. "We can be the team of the Rockies," says Foley in a Q&A, adding he thinks Seattle should get a team.
Las Vegas' first pro team is hitting the road to drum up fan support. Take a front-row seat on the bus as the Golden Knights travel throughout the west to meet new fans.
Will Connor McDavid's new deal change the game for the league's young guns? Will Vegas be more than a flash in the pan? Do the Penguins have another Cup in them? The coming year promises plenty of intrigue.
The rink reopened in 2012 -- built with a $2 million insurance settlement and another $800,000 from fundraisers -- under a new name, Frontier. Learn-to-skate programs and hockey clubs resumed, but the sport still isn't hugely popular here. Idaho has only 3,582 registered hockey players, and it's a non-sanctioned high school sport in the state. Only two Idaho-born players ever made it to the NHL: Guyle Fielder and Pat Shea each played fewer than 15 NHL games, both before 1960.
But, as some residents surmise, maybe the dearth of players is simply a connectivity problem.
"Our family is [Colorado] Avalanche fans," Nicole Leppert says. "But we only get to see them on TV occasionally."
"My wife is a [Dallas] Stars and [Washington] Capitals fan, because she used to live in those areas," Mike Pennick says. "I just root for whoever the Stars or Caps are playing because there was nobody around here to root for. We have 11 kids. None of them like hockey."
On Tuesday night, Leppert, Pennick and Smith were among the 250 people who showed up at Frontier Ice Arena. Leppert was there for her son's first skating lesson. Smith was there out of curiosity. Pennick was there for the spectacle.
In the parking lot sat a 45-foot bus belonging to the Vegas Golden Knights, the NHL's newest expansion team. Inside the rink, Calvin Pickard -- a goalie Vegas selected in the expansion draft in June -- did laps and took selfies during a free open skate sponsored by the Knights. "When you see something like this, you wonder," Pennick says. "Maybe, eventually, this area could be known for hockey."
When the puck drops for the Knights' home opener on Oct. 10, they will become the first professional sports team to call Las Vegas home. And while it remains to be seen how a hockey team will be received in an area bursting with tourism and transplants -- although owner Bill Foley boasts the Knights are already "in the top third of the league" in terms of ticket revenue and have "basically sold out" -- the franchise has schemed a plan to increase its odds. Towns like Coeur d'Alene, which is more than 1,000 miles away from Vegas, will become Knights territory. So will the entire states of Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Utah and Wyoming -- and even slivers of Arizona and California. They all comprise authorized distribution areas for Knights television broadcasts.
"There's no professional sports team that attacks that marketplace, that's involved in that marketplace," Foley says. "So we can be the team of the Rockies, the professional sports team of the Rockies."
In Foley's view, if he can drum up support, fans will eventually come to a game. "There's a direct flight to Vegas for every major city in this area," he says.
This week, the Knights embarked on a four-stop, three-state tour of that territory. ESPN rode along for 36 hours of the caravan, a stretch spanning from Coeur d'Alene to Whitefish, Montana, and saw a snapshot of how an expansion team can engage with its new community -- even when that community seems sprawling.
Pickard is sunburned. It's 3 p.m. local time on Tuesday, and his day has already included a flight from his offseason home in Winnipeg to Spokane, Washington, a 45-minute Uber ride across the Idaho state line, a three-hour jet-ski cruise around Lake Coeur d'Alene -- and, apparently, no time for sunscreen. "Just checking out the cabins, and, yeah, it's gorgeous," Pickard says. "Some of those cabins ... let's just say I've been known to log quite a few hours on Zillow."
Both here and back in Winnipeg, people seem to have the same advice for Pickard about the perils of playing in Las Vegas.
"Everyone says: Don't put it all on red," the 25-year-old says. "But as I've learned, there's a lot more to Vegas then gambling. It's really a great community with a lot to offer. And on this trip, I'm seeing there's a lot more to our area and fan base than just Vegas."
Pickard's meeting spot for the bus is the parking lot of a Holiday Inn Express in Coeur d'Alene.
"Well, look at this," Pickard says, scanning the caravan the team rented for the week. Normally the bus company takes this 120-seater out for tourist day trips to the Hoover Dam or Grand Canyon. The Knights took it out of rotation, slathered it with a black decal, their logo, and a bold message:
PUCK DROPS OCT. 10. ONLY IN VEGAS.
The bus reminds players of the mode of transportation most of them were relegated to in junior hockey. Pickard recalls sprawling across the floor for five-, six- or seven-hour rides, the rumbling of the wheels lulling him to sleep.
The evening's itinerary isn't quite as drastic. They'll drive five miles to the local rink, where the Knights are sponsoring free skating and ice rental --- and the chance to meet Pickard.
As he exits the bus, Pickard grabs his skates and pivots. "Wait," he says. "I can't go in like this." The skate guards on his blades are emblemized with the Colorado Avalanche logo -- Pickard's former team. He peels off the guards and tosses them onto an empty seat.
The arena is abuzz by 5:45 p.m., with more than 150 kids and adults lacing up skates and buying $5 cheese pizzas from the snack bar. The Knights did little advertising for the event aside from posting on social media; there's an 8 1/2-by-11-inch printout taped to the door of the arena promoting the event. Most local families learned about it from the arena's email newsletter.
But perhaps nobody is as excited as 14-year-old Clayton Yates and 11-year-old Rohdy Yates, from Strathmore, Alberta. The brothers were on Day 2 of a camping trip with their family in Spokane when Clayton saw the Knights' post on Instagram. It didn't take but 10 minutes of begging until he convinced his parents to take the camper on a 45-minute sojourn to Coeur d'Alene. Says Clayton, who is sporting a black Knights T-shirt: "The reason I wanted to come so bad, and the reason I'm now a Vegas Golden Knights fan, is because then I could say I've been a fan since the start."
The bus leaves Coeur d'Alene just before 9 a.m. on Wednesday, driving through 222 miles, a national forest, a reservation and a time zone to reach Whitefish, Montana. Pickard peeled off the trip back in Idaho -- he's returning to Winnipeg to resume his training -- so in Montana, the bus will meet up with Jake Bischoff and Alex Tuch, two prospects the Knights acquired via trades who will vie for roster spots this fall. The meetup spot: a McDonald's parking lot in Kalispell, Montana.
"When [the team] asked me if I wanted to go to Montana," Bischoff says. "I was like, 'Well, why not?' "
Whitefish is also the headquarters for Foley's restaurant group and the home of Murray Craven, the former NHL center who is now a senior VP for the Knights and one of Foley's closest hockey advisors through the expansion bid.
There's more of a hockey community here than in Idaho, and it helps that Craven is active in the youth hockey programs and Stumptown Ice Den in town. By virtue of being an hour south of the Canadian border and just five hours away from Calgary, there are a decent number of Flames fans in town. "I used to like Johnny Gaudreau," 13-year-old Joey says. "Now my dad says we are going to watch the Knights games on TV. So I like Alex [Tuch] because I just met him."
The Knights brought a hype man to their hockey clinic.
Nearly 200 boys and girls crowd onto the ice for the clinic, which includes a hype man emceeing with a microphone while on skates. Before the clinic began, the emcee gathered the group in a circle at center ice for a special introduction. He pointed toward Foley and said, "That man right there is responsible for bringing the NHL to the Rockies. ... The ... owner ... of the Vegas Golden Knights!"
The kids tapped their sticks on the ice and then raised them in salute to the billionaire.
Looking on was Lanny McDonald, the Hall of Famer who captained the Flames to their only Stanley Cup, in 1989. McDonald has had a home in Whitefish for 40 years, and two of his grandchildren were skating in the clinic.
"Hockey in this area is growing slowly," McDonald says. "An event like this will help it grow by leaps and bounds. If the Knights keep doing events like this in [the] community, I can't understate what an impact that would have. You see how well it worked in Nashville, a nontraditional hockey market. Now, like in Nashville, it takes time, and you have to work at it. But it's possible this can be a hockey area, too."

COEUR D'ALENE, Idaho -- Puck drop is less than two months away for the Golden Knights, and many still wonder how a hockey team can thrive in an area best known for tourism and gambling. But the Knights are looking past the Las Vegas Strip for support -- further than the suburbs, too. The Knights' broadcast footprint stretches across parts of Idaho, Montana and Utah.
This week, a handful of players and executives are boarding a caravan to explore their new territory. ESPN has been offered a seat on the bus for a behind-the-scenes glimpse into how Vegas' first pro team is trying to engage its new community ... a couple hundred miles at a time.
Wednesday from Idaho to Whitefish, Montana
Bill Foley explains why he believes the Golden Knights will be "the team of the Rockies."

The ice arena in Whitefish, Montana keeps with the town's rustic aesthetic. Bonus: there's a rink dog.

The Knights brought a hype man to their hockey clinic.

Alex Tuch and Jake Bischoff were roommates at USA Hockey National Team Development Program camp. Now they're teammates for the Knights. Are they still compatible? Let's find out.

Knights Alex Tuch and Jake Bischoff chat with Hockey Hall of Famer Lanny McDonald. Can report Lanny's mustache game is strong as ever.

At Bill Foley's office in Whitefish, Montana: a collection of his wines (he owns 19 wineries) and a replica of what he'd like to win in his newest venture.

Bill Foley's ranch has some views.

This is Golden Knights owner Bill Foley's ranch in Montana. And this is Bill Foley's horse, Marist.

Nothing to see here. Just waiting to pick up some hockey players in a McDonald's parking lot.

Off to Montana!

Morning in Idaho.

Tuesday in Idaho
Not your average sight at a Holiday Inn Express. After a day of driving 480 miles, the bus is treated to a  170-gallon fill up (and a nearly $500 gas bill) before turning in for the night.

Not everybody is a Las Vegas Knights convert... yet.

Perhaps nobody traveled as far to see the Knights on Tuesday night as these brothers from Alberta, Canada. They were on a family camping trip in Spokane when.... (we'll let 14-year-old Clayton Yates take it from here)

Only two Idaho-born players have made it to the NHL: Guyle Fielder & Pat Shea. Both played before 1960. Maple Leafs star Auston Matthews is the reigning success story for the NHL's Sun Belt expansion (Matthews, born in Arizona, began playing hockey after attending a Coyotes game), but the Knights could dot the map with a few more examples.

Hockey, in Idaho, is a non-sanctioned high school sport. There's only 3,582 registered hockey players in the state, per USA Hockey. This rink in Coeur d'Alene is the only full-sized ice arena in Northern, Idaho -- and the only one within a 45 minute radius.

In Coeur d'Alene, Idaho more than 200 showed up for a free open skate, sponsored by the Knights. Vegas goalie Calvin Pickard, who played with the Avs last season, was the main attraction.

Golden Knights goalie Calvin Pickard explains Vegas perception vs reality.

Here's the bus the Golden Knights will be traveling in on their first road trip.

The Golden Knight rises.

When Las Vegas got an NHL team, many wondered if the city would rally around it. But the Golden Knights aren't just counting on Vegas for support. The team's television coverage area includes parts of Idaho, Montana and Utah. This trip, which includes hockey clinics and community events, is a glimpse into how Vegas' first pro sports team is drumming up support ....literally by putting skates on the ground.

Greetings from Coeur d'Alene, Idaho. For the next 36 hours, I'll be joining the Vegas Golden Knights on their inaugural caravan tour as players and execs board a bus and travel hundreds of miles across Idaho, Montana and Utah to introduce themselves to new fans.


During Nick Saban’s 10 seasons at Alabama, 65 Crimson Tide players have been drafted into the NFL. Today, 21 of those players are out of pro football, including 12 who were selected in the first four rounds. That is to say: Julio Jones is Julio Jones, and many, many others are not Julio Jones but nurse those same physical scars of SEC football.
In May, they watched as Saban became the highest-paid coach in American sports—not to mention one of the highest-paid public employees in the country—by signing a contract extension that will pay him more than $11 million per year.
Terry Bradshaw labeled the salary as “shameful.” A Chicago Tribune headline: “Nick Saban's obscene new salary blurs the line between college and pros.” But what do the forgotten alumni of America’s most successful football powerhouse think? Do the men whose careers ended at the doorstep of fame and fortune believe Saban deserves the cash? Should college football players be compensated, beyond their living expenses and a paid-for education? In short, yes and yes.

“Here’s what I will say,” says former Alabama defensive back Marquis Johnson. “I don't need Nick’s salary. Saban deserves that $11.5 million, like LeBron should make $100 million.”
Johnson played two years the NFL, appearing in five games between the 2010 and ’11 seasons as a seventh-round pick of the Rams. He’s had 12 surgeries related to his four years of college football, with operations on his hip, thumb and knee during his time in Tuscaloosa. A knee hyperextension as a senior stunted his NFL development and inspired him to start a medical sales company in Atlanta—24 Consulting (the “24” being an homage to his jersey number at Alabama). During his four years in school, the University of Alabama’s profits from football alone totaled just under $200 million.
“I look at the grand scheme of things,” Johnson says. “I provided a product and we [won] every year. If I’m Nick Saban, I should make that money, but we have enough money where my players should make that money, too.”
Saban himself has toed the line on the issue, saying he supports paying players but doesn’t know of a fair way to accomplish that goal. He’s argued that paying players runs the risk of devaluing scholarships, and that universities already invest a great deal into the athletic and academic success of players.

More than 18 months after Northwestern football players were denied in their attempt to unionize, there has been little progress on the matter. The only notable progress: In February, the National Labor Relations Board ruled that football players at private university are employees, and therefore entitled to protection from unfair labor practices. (That ruling will not affect Alabama, a public school.)

It’s true that Alabama football spends a great deal of resources on the academic success of its players. For example, Johnson took advantage of a hired note-taker for classes through his junior season. But some players argue the rigor of the college football calendar prevented them from taking part in extracurriculars essential to employers, such as internships and part-time jobs in the field of their choosing.
Nico Johnson, a fourth-round pick of the Kansas City Chiefs in 2013, spent three seasons in the league with three different teams, appearing in 18 games at linebacker while never fully recovering from a sports hernia surgery following his final game at Alabama. This year, he found himself across the desk from a potential employer, describing his work experience.

“I have my degree, but because I don’t have that experience, like a regular college kid who had an internship for two years, it’s easier for him to get a job.”
Nico Johnson says he once believed paying college football players would be a distraction to players and programs, but recently he’s come around to the idea of compensating athletes in revenue sports.
“I was always the guy who said, ‘How would they manage that?’ I thought like Saban, prepared like Saban. And I thought, if players got paid, would that keep players from putting forth that effort?
“But I just had to sit back and be real and think about how difficult it was to do things I really wanted to do. I talk to the kids there today about how difficult it is just to go home one weekend because they don’t have enough money for gas. You should be able to enjoy yourself a little bit.”

The three former Alabama players who spoke to The MMQB wondered how paying college football players would affect the collegial atmosphere of the sport. There’s an inherent risk, they said, in making big-time college football feel too much like pro football.
“I just think there’s something about college—it made me appreciate the pureness of the sport so much more,” says Barrett Jones, who won the Rimington Trophy, awarded to the top center in college football, in 2012 but was out of the NFL by ’14. “You’re playing for the guy next to you, you're playing for the love of the game. Of course there’s still that in the NFL, and also, if they paid athletes in college, I’d like to think that same sentiment would remain.”
Jones graduated summa cum laude with a 4.0 GPA, majoring in accounting. For him, the NFL was never the “be-all, end-all” goal. He didn’t see college as a mere vehicle to get to the NFL; he just wanted to savor the college experience. But as his team won games the individual accolades followed, and soon he was being mentioned as a top draft prospect.
But in the 2012 SEC Championship game on Dec. 1, Jones injured his foot. Afterward, doctors diagnosed a Lisfranc injury. They advised him against playing in the BCS title game later that month, but Jones insisted. “The doctors were awesome,” Jones says, noting that at no point did they pressure him to play. Rather, they did everything they could to help accommodate him. They flew him to Oregon (with a cast and motorized scooter) for a session at Nike’s headquarters to get fit for a customized shoe. The training staff flew out an anti-gravity treadmill to Miami [the site of the title game] just for Jones. He was the only one to use it.
“Do I have regrets?” Jones says. “No. I’m glad I did it. For the NFL, it probably wasn’t the smartest move. I had a surgery after the season and that put me out a few months. I couldn't participate in the combine, which affected my stock. I wasn't the same physically after that.”
“The injury, it probably cost me a little bit in my draft position, which cost me money. Did my NFL career pan out as well as I thought it could have? No. But I wouldn’t have done anything differently.”




When the NFL was founded in 1920, it used the ‘H’ design for its uprights and placed them on the goal line. In 1927, the league moved the posts back 10 yards, to the back of the end zone. The reasoning? That’s what the NCAA did. At the time, the NFL simply followed the college rulebook. But that was short-lived. In 1933, the NFL finally wrote its own rulebook. And in an effort to increase field goal attempts—the general feeling was that there were too many ties—the NFL moved the uprights back to the goal line.
As Ben Austro, author of the popular NFL officiating blog “Football Zebras” notes: “a receiver could use the goalpost as a pick, just as they did with the umpire.”

“The goal line goal post was part of offensive strategy,” says Don Criqui, the famed broadcaster who began calling NFL games in 1967. “It was an extra blocker on goal-one runs and crossing patterns. Receivers Lance Alworth of the Chargers and Bernie Casey of the LA Rams were two of the best I saw at using the goal post to screen defenders on pass patterns. Goal line goal posts brought excitement and danger.”

If a pass hit the metal uprights, it would automatically be ruled incomplete. This was famously applied in Super Bowl VII when, in the fourth quarter, Washington quarterback Billy Kilmer missed a wide-open Jerry Smith in the end zone and bounced the ball off the post. The Dolphins won, 14-7, though it should also be noted Kilmer was intercepted three times that day.
“Oh, it happened all the time,” says Johnson. “If you were on your 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-yard line, you drop back and there’s a good chance you’d hit it . . . and usually when I threw it, I did.”


In the years to come, the kicking game became too commonplace. In 1973, a record 543 field goals were made on 861 attempts—an average of five per game. Field goals accounted for 23% of the scoring that season, compared to 15% in 1969, the NFL’s last year before the AFL-NFL merger. Owners wanted more touchdowns. When players returned from the 1974 strike, they found the goal posts in the back of the end zone, which did the trick to curtail the kicking game. In 1974, only 335 field goals were made—or 15% of the scoring.
It created more offense, too. As Paul Brown told SI in 1974: “The whole end zone is open for pass patterns now; the goalposts were, in effect, another safety man when you got inside the 20. You couldn’t run or pass around them. And it was hard to punt or pass coming out of the end zone.”
For the last 42 seasons, the NFL hasn’t found a reason to revert—and it likely never will given the safety issues.
“And that’s all I know about goal posts,” says Johnson. “I guess it’s more interesting than I thought.”





GM Jason Licht had a clear off-season directive: give Jameis Winston as many weapons as possible. Winston is only 23, with two 4,000-yard seasons. However the Bucs are wary of the quarterback’s turnover problem. Winston threw 18 interceptions in 2016, with 10 fumbles (six lost). Many times, it feels like Winston tries to do too much himself. To remedy that, Licht surrounded Winston with playmakers who can relieve some of that pressure.​
It began in free agency with wideout DeSean Jackson (three years, $35 million). The 30-year-old speedster has built a reputation over nine seasons as the best friend to a quarterback. Paired with budding superstar Mike Evans (three straight 1,000 yard seasons) and the Bucs may have the best 1-2 receiver punch in the league. Actually make that 1-2-3, as Tampa Bay found a gem in the third round by drafting Penn State’s Chris Godwin. Most evaluators pegged Godwin as a second-round talent. The 6-foot-1, 209-pound Godwin is deceptively fast, averaged 16.6 yards per catch last year while possessing many of the same traits (separation on routes, ability to win contested catches) that made his Nittany Lion predecessor, Allen Robinson, successful in Jacksonville.

The running game figures to be interesting, as well. Incumbent Doug Martin struggled last season (2.9 yards per carry) and left the team with one game remaining to serve a four-game PED suspension and check into a drug treatment facility. That suspension will spill into 2017, but one of the reasons the Buccaneers didn’t draft a running back in the first round—Winston’s former Florida State teammate, Dalvin Cook, was a potential match—was that the front office apparently feels comfortable with the strides Martin has made this offseason. Martin, of course, had an outstanding rookie season in 2012 with 1,454 yards and 11 touchdowns. He’s only matched that production once, in 2015. If Martin can’t find his groove, Tampa Bay found a worthy replacement in fifth-rounder Jeremy McNichols from Boise State. It seems important to note that McNichols and Martin have nearly identical statures (5-foot-9 and stocky) and skill sets. Licht has praised McNichols as the best pass-protecting running back in the draft, and like Martin, he adds value as a pass-catcher. In fact, McNichols was a wideout in high school. Perhaps Tampa Bay will find a role for both of its running backs, two more weapons to add to Winston’s arsenal.




The Saints haven’t made the playoffs for three straight years, and you can sense some urgency to squeeze one more run out of 38-year-old quarterback Drew Brees. New Orleans was very active this off-season and although much attention will be paid to the late addition of Adrian Peterson (more on that later) it’s clear the front office is aware of its biggest hurdle: a leaky defense.
New Orleans’ three biggest area of needs heading into the off-season? The secondary, the pass rush, and depth at linebacker. The Saints first addressed linebacker in free agency. New Orleans recently has relied on a rotating cast of versatile linebackers and 2017 should be no different. Entering the mix is A.J. Klein, the 25-year-old who comes from the division rival Panthers. The Saints paid Klein starter’s money (three years, $15 million) meaning he should be manning the middle. New Orleans also added Manti Te’o at a bit of a bargain (two years, $5 million). Should Te’o’s health hold up — he missed 13 games in his first three seasons because of foot or ankle injuries — the 26-year-old could surprise. And in the draft’s third round, New Orleans added Florida linebacker Alex Anzalone. He, too, faces durability questions, but he has excellent size and athleticism and experience playing in all three linebacker spots.
That Ohio State cornerback Marshon Lattimore was available at No. 11 was a blessing for New Orleans, in desperate need of a lockdown corner. A deal for Malcolm Butler never came to fruition, but that’s fine because Lattimore’s ball skills (four interceptions and nine pass breakups in his lone year as a starter) are elite. In a historically deep year for cornerbacks, Lattimore was the top-rated on most team’s boards. Marcus Williams from Utah is a ball-hawking free safety who, paired with Lattimore, will give the league’s worst ranked pass defense (274 yards allowed per game in 2016) an immediate boost.
Fans will gripe that New Orleans only answered to two of its three defensive needs. The Saints were unsuccessful in finding a pass-rushing talent to relieve some pressure from Cam Jordan. UCLA’s Takkarist McKinley would have been a great fit, but the division-rival Falcons swooped ahead to draft him. With New Orleans’ top pass-rushing targets (Taco Charlton, Charles Harris and McKinley) gone at No. 32, the Saints used the pick they got from trading Brandin Cooks for future offensive line assurance in Wisconsin’s Ryan Ramczyk. Adding who many considered to be the draft’s top offensive tackle isn’t a bad choice, but it’s fair to wonder if not addressing the pass-rush will ultimately doom this team.
The loss of Cooks shouldn’t be too much of a blow for Brees. Free agent addition Ted Ginn Jr. is a lesser version of Cooks, but Brees will likely pay more attention to emerging star Michael Thomas and Willie Snead. (Don’t totally sleep on undrafted free agent Travin Dural of LSU, although his immediate impact might be on special teams). And of course, there is Peterson. The 32-year-old is thirsty for redemption and might just find it in a downhill run game reminiscent of what he was used to in Minnesota. Third-round draft choice Alvin Kamara may seem like a luxury pick (especially with Mark Ingram coming off a 1,000 yard season) but like the Ramczyk selection, the Saints are preparing for life beyond 2017 as well.




The 2017 season is all about getting Cam Newton back on track. Over the past three years, Newton’s medical history includes ankle surgery, shoulder surgery, a fractured back, cracked ribs, and a concussion. It all seemed to catch up to the Panthers in 2016.
After an MVP season in 2015, in which Newton led Carolina to an NFC championship with a career-high 15 wins, the quarterback’s sputtering 2016 was a major league storyline. Newton’s 90 carries and 359 rushing yards were his lowest totals since entering the league in 2011 and his completion percentage (52.9) was almost seven points lower than his 2015 mark. Newton was sacked 36 times and underwent surgery on his throwing shoulder in March. Newton suffered the partial tear in his rotator cuff in Week 14, and says he played through it to demonstrate leadership.
Panthers GM Dave Gettleman didn’t act as drastically as he did last offseason—read: no Josh Norman-esque drama—but he was active in making life easier for Newton post-surgery, and allowing the offense to evolve. In using its first-round selection on Christian McCaffrey, Carolina not only picked up a running back, but a do-it-all weapon so that Newton doesn’t feel he has to make all plays by himself. At Stanford, McCaffrey easily surpassed Barry Sanders’ longstanding record for single-season all-purpose yards (McCaffrey totaled 3,864, compared to Sanders’ 3,250). Expect McCaffrey to line up in the backfield, in the slot or out wide, take traditional handoffs between tackles, or handoffs around the edge and return punts or kicks.

Newton has never had a season where he was sacked less than 33 times. In an effort to limit, the Panthers might lessen the design QB runs in their offense. They also worked on beefing up the offensive line with another second-round pick, Western Michigan offensive lineman Taylor Moton. The 6-foot-5, 319-pound lineman can play right tackle or guard, but his physical and athletic traits should benefit Newton in 2017 and beyond.
The Panthers didn’t tinker a ton on defense this offseason, but the moves they made sure are interesting. Carolina has arguably the top linebacking corps in football, but added two pass-rushers who could help generate more pressure. In free agency, the Panthers added 37-year-old Julius Peppers. It’s more than just a trip down memory lane; Peppers tallied 7.5 sacks for the Packers last year while playing less than 60 percent of the team’s defensive snaps. Carolina also traded up in the third round for Texas A&M’s Daeshon Hall, who may need some development. He’s still learning the nuances of defensive end after beginning his career as a linebacker, but has tremendous potential in getting after quarterbacks.




Let’s not harp on the blown Super Bowl lead, and instead remember that the Falcons were an exceptionally good football team in 2016, especially on offense. Atlanta scored 540 points in the regular season—seventh most in league history—as Matt Ryan found his stride, and Tevin Coleman and Devonta Freeman emerged as the NFL’s fiercest running back tandem. The good news: Atlanta brings back almost nearly every major player from that offense. (While fullback Patrick DiMarco, who signed a four-year, $8.5 million deal in Buffalo, was popular among fans, the truth is he only played in 31 percent of Atlanta’s snaps last season.) This offseason, it’s clear GM Thomas Dimitroff didn’t want to tinker too much with a good thing; he even re-upped backup QB Matt Schaub for two more years. An extension for Freeman,  who is in the final year of his rookie deal, could be on the way.
However the Falcons do lose the man most credit with orchestrating the offense: coordinator Kyle Shanahan, who became the 49ers head coach. How much of the success can be attributed to the play-caller and how much in the talent he’s surrounded by? That’s not so easy to parse. Atlanta does have an intriguing replacement in Steve Sarkisian, the former Washington and USC coach who spent last year on Alabama’s staff. Sarkisian is known in college football circles as an innovative mind, and already Falcons players have noted the coach has added a few new wrinkles to Atlanta’s playbook. For now, more details are scarce.
The Falcons did get some help on defense. Atlanta actually ranked 27th in the league in points allowed (25.4 per game). The Falcons should immediately improve with the return of top cornerback Desmond Trufant, who suffered a season-ending pectoral injury in Week 9. Dimitroff has a ton of faith in Trufant and showed it with a five-year contract extension this spring—his $41.5 million guaranteed trails only Joe Haden, Josh Norman and Patrick Peterson.
But more pressing for the Falcons is the front seven. Gone is 37-year-old Dwight Freeney, who had an important role and played very well in the Super Bowl. Dontari Poe, signed on a one-year deal, feels like a quick fix for that. But Atlanta really needs a long-term solution alongside Vic Beasley, so it was important for the Falcons to draft an edge rusher. Quinn is going to take a larger role on defense, and his preference has always been in subbing many players through the front seven. That’s why Atlanta traded up to snag UCLA’s Takkarist McKinley in the first round. McKinley is a highly emotional player (look no further than draft night) who melds perfectly into Quinn’s “brotherhood.” But just as important: McKinley is an ascending talent with tremendous upside as a pass-rusher. In the fall, a scout told me he thought McKinley could be the next DeMarcus Ware.
Overall, it seemed Dimitroff didn’t push the panic button after the Super Bowl collapse. He barely touched the offense and made enough tweaks on defense to hope his players can repeat what they did in 2016, with a better finish.

The aftershocks of free agency and the draft have subsided around the NFL—now teams have all summer to examine the strengths and weaknesses up and down their rosters. To recap all the biggest moves and get an early sense of who improved the most since the lights went out on Super Bowl LI, we filled out report cards for every NFC team in order to reset the landscape ahead of training camp.
Call these progress reports instead of report cards, if you must—after all, teams have two months to adjust their rosters before the long lead-up to Week 1 reveals how players on the move around the league are settling into their new homes. Still, it’s hard to imagine many unsigned veterans can drastically change a team’s 2017 outlook.
Below, SI/MMQB writers Emily Kaplan, Jonathan Jones, Chris Burke and Andy Benoit analyze (and criticize) the off-season moves of all 16 NFC teams. The report cards are listed in order of ascending grade.
 




Let’s not harp on the blown Super Bowl lead, and instead remember that the Falcons were an exceptionally good football team in 2016, especially on offense. Atlanta scored 540 points in the regular season—seventh most in league history—as Matt Ryan found his stride, and Tevin Coleman and Devonta Freeman emerged as the NFL’s fiercest running back tandem. The good news: Atlanta brings back almost nearly every major player from that offense. (While fullback Patrick DiMarco, who signed a four-year, $8.5 million deal in Buffalo, was popular among fans, the truth is he only played in 31 percent of Atlanta’s snaps last season.) This offseason, it’s clear GM Thomas Dimitroff didn’t want to tinker too much with a good thing; he even re-upped backup QB Matt Schaub for two more years. An extension for Freeman,  who is in the final year of his rookie deal, could be on the way.
However the Falcons do lose the man most credit with orchestrating the offense: coordinator Kyle Shanahan, who became the 49ers head coach. How much of the success can be attributed to the play-caller and how much in the talent he’s surrounded by? That’s not so easy to parse. Atlanta does have an intriguing replacement in Steve Sarkisian, the former Washington and USC coach who spent last year on Alabama’s staff. Sarkisian is known in college football circles as an innovative mind, and already Falcons players have noted the coach has added a few new wrinkles to Atlanta’s playbook. For now, more details are scarce.
The Falcons did get some help on defense. Atlanta actually ranked 27th in the league in points allowed (25.4 per game). The Falcons should immediately improve with the return of top cornerback Desmond Trufant, who suffered a season-ending pectoral injury in Week 9. Dimitroff has a ton of faith in Trufant and showed it with a five-year contract extension this spring—his $41.5 million guaranteed trails only Joe Haden, Josh Norman and Patrick Peterson.

But more pressing for the Falcons is the front seven. Gone is 37-year-old Dwight Freeney, who had an important role and played very well in the Super Bowl. Dontari Poe, signed on a one-year deal, feels like a quick fix for that. But Atlanta really needs a long-term solution alongside Vic Beasley, so it was important for the Falcons to draft an edge rusher. Quinn is going to take a larger role on defense, and his preference has always been in subbing many players through the front seven. That’s why Atlanta traded up to snag UCLA’s Takkarist McKinley in the first round. McKinley is a highly emotional player (look no further than draft night) who melds perfectly into Quinn’s “brotherhood.” But just as important: McKinley is an ascending talent with tremendous upside as a pass-rusher. In the fall, a scout told me he thought McKinley could be the next DeMarcus Ware.
Overall, it seemed Dimitroff didn’t push the panic button after the Super Bowl collapse. He barely touched the offense and made enough tweaks on defense to hope his players can repeat what they did in 2016, with a better finish.

* * *



The 2017 season is all about getting Cam Newton back on track. Over the past three years, Newton’s medical history includes ankle surgery, shoulder surgery, a fractured back, cracked ribs, and a concussion. It all seemed to catch up to the Panthers in 2016.
After an MVP season in 2015, in which Newton led Carolina to an NFC championship with a career-high 15 wins, the quarterback’s sputtering 2016 was a major league storyline. Newton’s 90 carries and 359 rushing yards were his lowest totals since entering the league in 2011 and his completion percentage (52.9) was almost seven points lower than his 2015 mark. Newton was sacked 36 times and underwent surgery on his throwing shoulder in March. Newton suffered the partial tear in his rotator cuff in Week 14, and says he played through it to demonstrate leadership.
Panthers GM Dave Gettleman didn’t act as drastically as he did last offseason—read: no Josh Norman-esque drama—but he was active in making life easier for Newton post-surgery, and allowing the offense to evolve. In using its first-round selection on Christian McCaffrey, Carolina not only picked up a running back, but a do-it-all weapon so that Newton doesn’t feel he has to make all plays by himself. At Stanford, McCaffrey easily surpassed Barry Sanders’ longstanding record for single-season all-purpose yards (McCaffrey totaled 3,864, compared to Sanders’ 3,250). Expect McCaffrey to line up in the backfield, in the slot or out wide, take traditional handoffs between tackles, or handoffs around the edge and return punts or kicks.


Newton has never had a season where he was sacked less than 33 times. In an effort to limit, the Panthers might lessen the design QB runs in their offense. They also worked on beefing up the offensive line with another second-round pick, Western Michigan offensive lineman Taylor Moton. The 6-foot-5, 319-pound lineman can play right tackle or guard, but his physical and athletic traits should benefit Newton in 2017 and beyond.
The Panthers didn’t tinker a ton on defense this offseason, but the moves they made sure are interesting. Carolina has arguably the top linebacking corps in football, but added two pass-rushers who could help generate more pressure. In free agency, the Panthers added 37-year-old Julius Peppers. It’s more than just a trip down memory lane; Peppers tallied 7.5 sacks for the Packers last year while playing less than 60 percent of the team’s defensive snaps. Carolina also traded up in the third round for Texas A&M’s Daeshon Hall, who may need some development. He’s still learning the nuances of defensive end after beginning his career as a linebacker, but has tremendous potential in getting after quarterbacks.





The Saints haven’t made the playoffs for three straight years, and you can sense some urgency to squeeze one more run out of 38-year-old quarterback Drew Brees. New Orleans was very active this offseason and although much attention will be paid to the late addition of Adrian Peterson (more on that later) it’s clear the front office is aware of its biggest hurdle: a leaky defense.
New Orleans’ three biggest area of needs heading into the offseason? The secondary, the pass rush, and depth at linebacker. The Saints first addressed linebacker in free agency. New Orleans recently has relied on a rotating cast of versatile linebackers and 2017 should be no different. Entering the mix is A.J. Klein, the 25-year-old who comes from the division rival Panthers. The Saints paid Klein starter’s money (three years, $15 million) meaning he should be manning the middle. New Orleans also added Manti Te’o at a bit of a bargain (two years, $5 million). Should Te’o’s health hold up — he missed 13 games in his first three seasons because of foot or ankle injuries — the 26-year-old could surprise. And in the draft’s third round, New Orleans added Florida linebacker Alex Anzalone. He, too, faces durability questions, but he has excellent size and athleticism and experience playing in all three linebacker spots.
That Ohio State cornerback Marshon Lattimore was available at No. 11 was a blessing for New Orleans, in desperate need of a lockdown corner. A deal for Malcolm Butler never came to fruition, but that’s fine because Lattimore’s ball skills (four interceptions and nine pass breakups in his lone year as a starter) are elite. In a historically deep year for cornerbacks, Lattimore was the top-rated on most team’s boards. Marcus Williams from Utah is a ball-hawking free safety who, paired with Lattimore, will give the league’s worst ranked pass defense (274 yards allowed per game in 2016) an immediate boost.

Fans will gripe that New Orleans only answered to two of its three defensive needs. The Saints were unsuccessful in finding a pass-rushing talent to relieve some pressure from Cam Jordan. UCLA’s Takkarist McKinley would have been a great fit, but the division-rival Falcons swooped ahead to draft him. With New Orleans’ top pass-rushing targets (Taco Charlton, Charles Harris and McKinley) gone at No. 32, the Saints used the pick they got from trading Brandin Cooks for future offensive line assurance in Wisconsin’s Ryan Ramczyk. Adding who many considered to be the draft’s top offensive tackle isn’t a bad choice, but it’s fair to wonder if not addressing the pass-rush will ultimately doom this team.
The loss of Cooks shouldn’t be too much of a blow for Brees. Free agent addition Ted Ginn Jr. is a lesser version of Cooks, but Brees will likely pay more attention to emerging star Michael Thomas and Willie Snead. (Don’t totally sleep on undrafted free agent Travin Dural of LSU, although his immediate impact might be on special teams). And of course, there is Peterson. The 32-year-old is thirsty for redemption and might just find it in a downhill run game reminiscent of what he was used to in Minnesota. Third-round draft choice Alvin Kamara may seem like a luxury pick (especially with Mark Ingram coming off a 1,000 yard season) but like the Ramczyk selection, the Saints are preparing for life beyond 2017 as well.





GM Jason Licht had a clear offseason directive: give Jameis Winston as many weapons as possible. Winston is only 23, with two 4,000-yard seasons. However the Bucs are wary of the quarterback’s turnover problem. Winston threw 18 interceptions in 2016, with 10 fumbles (six lost). Many times, it feels like Winston tries to do too much himself. To remedy that, Licht surrounded Winston with playmakers who can relieve some of that pressure.
It began in free agency with wideout DeSean Jackson (three years, $35 million). The 30-year-old speedster has built a reputation over nine seasons as the best friend to a quarterback. Paired with budding superstar Mike Evans (three straight 1,000 yard seasons) and the Bucs may have the best 1-2 receiver punch in the league. Actually make that 1-2-3, as Tampa Bay found a gem in the third round by drafting Penn State’s Chris Godwin. Most evaluators pegged Godwin as a second-round talent. The 6-foot-1, 209-pound Godwin is deceptively fast, averaged 16.6 yards per catch last year while possessing many of the same traits (separation on routes, ability to win contested catches) that made his Nittany Lion predecessor, Allen Robinson, successful in Jacksonville.


The running game figures to be interesting, as well. Incumbent Doug Martin struggled last season (2.9 yards per carry) and left the team with one game remaining to serve a four-game PED suspension and check into a drug treatment facility. That suspension will spill into 2017, but one of the reasons the Buccaneers didn’t draft a running back in the first round—Winston’s former Florida State teammate, Dalvin Cook, was a potential match—was that the front office apparently feels comfortable with the strides Martin has made this offseason. Martin, of course, had an outstanding rookie season in 2012 with 1,454 yards and 11 touchdowns. He’s only matched that production once, in 2015. If Martin can’t find his groove, Tampa Bay found a worthy replacement in fifth-rounder Jeremy McNichols from Boise State. It seems important to note that McNichols and Martin have nearly identical statures (5-foot-9 and stocky) and skill sets. Licht has praised McNichols as the best pass-protecting running back in the draft, and like Martin, he adds value as a pass-catcher. In fact, McNichols was a wideout in high school. Perhaps Tampa Bay will find a role for both of its running backs, two more weapons to add to Winston’s arsenal.

 






















With the 2017 draft in the books, The College Column is going on hiatus (or vacation?) until August. Before we go, here’s a beginner’s guide to everything we’re monitoring for the 2017 college football season and, yes, 2018 draft.
















* * *

* * *






On a cool night in mid-March, Mitchell Trubisky parked his beige 1997 Toyota Camry in the lot of Bin 54, Chapel Hill’s swankiest steakhouse. In a private dining room, he met the Bears’ decision-makers in this year’s draft: general manager Ryan Pace, coach John Fox, offensive coordinator Dowell Loggains, QB coach Dave Ragone and director of player personnel Josh Lucas. Underneath dimmed lights, the coaches scanned the 200-bottle wine list, Trubisky ordered a steak, and the conversation flowed all night. The Chicago contingent learned that Trubisky, Mr. Ohio in high school, had always dreamed of attending Ohio State; that he loves playing Pictionary with his family; and that he vowed to stick it out at UNC rather than transfer after he wasn’t named the starting quarterback during his first three seasons.
Afterward, Pace walked Trubisky to his car, a hand-me-down from grandma. They joked about the 170,000 miles on the odometer.


The Bears felt the same spark, but their ghosting was strategic.
A half hour before the draft began last Thursday night in Philadelphia, Pace finalized a dramatic trade with the 49ers, moving from No. 3 to No. 2 to get the Bears’ quarterback of the future. The move cost Chicago a third- and fourth-round pick in this year’s draft, plus a third-rounder next year; it also set into a motion a run on quarterbacks in the first round (Patrick Mahomes to Kansas City at No. 10, Deshaun Watson to Houston at No. 12) and set the tone for a wild night.
Pace himself wasn’t done surprising.
Chicago used three of its next four picks on players from below the FBS level: tight end Adam Shaheen of Division II Ashland, running back Tarik Cohen of FCS North Carolina A&T and offensive lineman Jordan Morgan of Division II Kutztown. The “outlier” was Alabama safety Eddie Jackson, the only player who fits one of Chicago’s biggest areas of need (the secondary). The twist here: Jackson is coming off a season in which he missed the final seven games with a broken left leg.
Says a high-ranking personnel man from an AFC team: “What the Bears did in this draft is unexpected to say the least. I assumed it would be a pretty standard draft for them. Ryan Pace has a reputation as a respected evaluator. He went against the grain, and that’s not necessarily a bad thing, but I’m not sure I really know what’s going on in Chicago.”
* * *
At 12:05 p.m. last Friday, a motorcade of four black SUVs rolled through the security gates at Halas Hall, the Bears’ training facility in the secluded suburbs an hour north of Chicago. Trubisky, wearing black sweats and Bears baseball hat, stepped out from the second car. A few steps into his walk, he shouted back to his mother, Jeanne. “Do you have my suitcase?” he asked. Once assured, the 22-year-old surveyed his new surroundings: the serene pond across the parking lot, the manicured lawns, and a statue of George Halas.
“Wow,” he said. “So this is it.”
Like Trubisky, Bears fans were also processing what was unfolding before them.
At the Bulls-Celtics playoff game later that night, Trubisky’s photo was shown on the Jumbotron. “A smattering of cheers, but the booing was audible,” says ABC7 reporter Dionne Miller, who covered the game. When the image switched to a live shot of Trubisky, the crowd realized their new quarterback was in the building. More cheers emerged, but with questionable sincerity. Talk radio was similarly abuzz with confusion. Lamented one caller to WGN Radio on Saturday: “So they sign another quarterback, I can't even remember his name…”

That would be Mike Glennon. On the first day of free agency, Pace offered the former Buccaneers backup a three-year, $45 million deal. Sources say Pace had honed in on Glennon months before free agency began, and though nobody expressed qualms with Chicago moving on from Jay Cutler, many around the league thought Pace likely bid against himself: He offered Glennon an average of $15 million per year when others might not have gone above $10 million per season.
Might Pace have bid against himself to land Trubisky as well? Asked about the ante Chicago gave up to get their QB, Jaguars EVP Tom Coughlin told beat reporters in Jacksonville, “Oh my gosh. Nothing like that has ever come my way.”
Pace isn’t worried about the perception. League sources say the Browns and Chiefs also coveted Trubisky and could have been a threat to up to No. 2. Of course, Trubisky still might have been available at No. 3, but Chicago’s GM didn’t want to resort to his backup plan. “You always feel like there’s competition,” he says. “So when you have conviction on something—you never know half the time. It’s like in free agency, when the agent tells you he’s got three other teams he’s working with. You never really know. You’ve just got to trust your conviction on it, and if you want a player you aggressively go get him.”
This offseason Chicago added more free agents (12) than any other team. Though most are middle-class signings (for example, Prince Amukamara, Marcus Cooper and Quintin Demps to patch the secondary; Markus Wheaton and Kendall Wright as No. 2 wideouts) Pace’s strategy was to throw as many darts as possible to see what sticks. With the third pick, the Bears could have selected a sure thing . . . one of the top safeties (Jamal Adams, Malik Hooker), corners (Marshon Lattimore, Tre’Davious White) or pass-rushers (Jonathan Allen, Solomon Thomas). Such a move would have made their already formidable defense even better in 2017, but the team still would have been a step behind its NFC North rivals. So Pace gambled on a quarterback who started only 13 games in college, a player who was a complete unknown at this time last year.
* * *
The day after Trubisky’s dinner with the Bears in March, the coaches conducted a workout. Trubisky’s college center, Lucas Crowley, snapped balls, and Trubisky did three-, five- and seven-step dropbacks. Former UNC wideouts Ryan Switzer (a fourth-round pick of the Cowboys) and Bug Howard (an undrafted free agent who signed with the Colts), plus tight end Jack Tabb (a 2015 UNC grad), ran routes. The session, which lasted about 90 minutes, went according to the Bears’ detailed script. Trubisky says he threw just about every throw on the route tree in their system.
“They were coaching me as if I was already on the team,” Trubisky says. “I think they wanted to see how I respond to coaching, how I adjust on the fly. I always tried my best when a team came to visit, but this was one of my better workouts.”
Before leaving, Pace asked Trubisky for a favor: Keep the workout under wraps. Trubisky obeyed. When other teams asked, he didn’t tell them Chicago had come to visit. The Bears were just as coy. They sent only director of college scouting Mark Sadowski, national scout Ryan Kessenich and area scout Chris Prescott to Trubisky’s actual pro day. (By contrast, not only did Fox, Loggains, Lucas, Pace and Ragone attend Deshaun Watson’s pro day at Clemson, but Fox spent nearly the entire session talking to Tigers coach Dabo Swinney).

Pace says he watched every snap Trubisky took in college, including the 2014 and 2015 seasons, when he sometimes relieved starter Marquise Williams. “Every time he got in the game,” Pace says, “something happened in a positive way.” Pace also says he saw Trubisky “play live multiple times,” though sources say the GM may have only attended the Sun Bowl and one other UNC game last season. To this, Pace joked that maybe he took in some games from the stands in disguise. The ultimate takeaway: The Bears did their due-diligence without sending up flares. Says UNC quarterbacks coach Keith Heckendorf, “I talked to so many different people throughout the process. I know early on the Bears had an interest, but I can’t say they did anything extraordinary.” Says Blake Anderson, who recruited Trubisky to Chapel Hill and was the Tar Heels’ offensive coordinator for one year before taking the head-coaching job at Arkansas State, “Sometimes when scouts came in to look at our players, they’d ask some questions about Mitch at the end. I don't think the Bears were one of those teams though.”

Sources say the Bears preferred Trubisky over Watson or Texas Tech’s Pat Mahomes because they felt his skill set best fits Loggain’s offense—and because he is poised to get on the field sooner. But that comes with a caveat: Ideally, Trubisky won’t take a regular-season snap in 2017—even as pressure mounts in Chicago to win.
* * *
The Bears have missed the playoffs six years running, and over the past two seasons together Pace and Fox are 9-23 in Chicago. But the quarterback of the future will sit behind Mike Glennon, whom Pace has publicly called the starter while Trubisky is groomed for the job down the road. Glennon’s contract is front-loaded, meaning the Bears can cut him after this season and pay only $18.5 million.
When asked what quarterback situation in the league he might be emulating, Pace cited a division rival. “I know a lot of people will talk about Green Bay when [Brett] Favre was there and Aaron Rodgers came in, and there was another veteran quarterback on the roster as well,” Pace said. “And the importance of Rodgers’ development while that was going on.” The Bears also have Mark Sanchez, a veteran under whom Trubisky can also learn.
On the day of the draft, Trubisky heard rumblings from his agent that the Bears might be making a move to get him. But Chicago never called to let him know. Nothing crystallized until Roger Goodell announced Trubisky’s name at No. 2. Then, just before 7:30 CT, Pace finally called to congratulate his new quarterback. It was the first time they had talked since having dinner in Chapel Hill.
“I knew this was going to happen—you just needed to hang in there,” Pace said. “Hey, you gotta promise me one thing, you gotta promise me one thing, OK? You’re going to drive your beat-up car here. Don’t change a thing with it.”


















Webb loves to study (the son of a coach, he'd eventually like to coach himself). He’ll learn for a year or two under one of the best in Carson Palmer.



































































For players the NFL draft represents the intersection of hard work and childhood dreams, but the months-long lead-up can feel anything but celebratory. From participating in the underwear Olympics (official title: NFL scouting combine) to braving interviews tinged with embarrassing questions ("Do you wear a G-string or a jockstrap when you play?"), a prospect is scrutinized for his talent and forbearance. Some aspiring NFLers find that draft night provides little relief.
On April 27, 22 men who are believed to be among the top 32 selections this year will be sequestered backstage at the 3,000-seat open-air theater along Philadelphia's Benjamin Franklin Parkway. The greenroom is the setting for some of the draft's most iconic moments, as rags-to-riches tales and plummeting-stock story lines play out for a live TV audience. "Attending the draft can be a great experience," says Bengals offensive lineman Eric Winston, an 11-year veteran and president of the players' association. "But it doesn't have to be the only experience."
The NFLPA wants to help players reclaim the night. Through ACE Media, a part of the union's for-profit arm, the NFLPA is helping organize personal draft experiences for three top prospects who decided to forgo the greenroom, and streaming the results.
Texas A&M defensive end Myles Garrett, the projected No. 1 pick, told his agent the red carpet isn't really his scene. Instead, ACE will host an intimate gathering at his home in Arlington, Texas, where it will surprise Garrett with appearances by two of his football idols. (ACE won't release the names.) Charles Harris, a defensive end from Missouri, wanted to be with his mother, Deborah Clark, who has multiple sclerosis and cannot travel. ACE will bring the celebration to them, in Kansas City. Ohio State safety Malik Hooker felt restricted by the NFL's two-guest restriction, so he's hosting a bash in his hometown, New Castle, Pa., for 50 of his nearest and dearest friends, with cameras and food provided by ACE.
ACE launched in 2015, aiming to portray the off-field lives of players while helping them build their own brands. This draft venture is a substantial step in its development. Even though top prospects who don't attend the draft miss out on massive exposure—round 1 drew 6.3 million viewers last year on ESPN—NFLPA executive director DeMaurice Smith believes that the smaller audiences can still deliver a large impact. Says Smith, "When players make decisions to attend the draft, they're often clustered together, like one monolithic pre-NFL block."

And sometimes the greenroom optics can be unflattering. Last year Mississippi tackle Laremy Tunsil provided token (or was it toking?) theatrics. A maliciously timed Twitter hack featuring images of Tunsil smoking from a bong dominated the night. As pundits debated the authenticity of the footage, the top-rated offensive lineman slipped to the Dolphins at No. 13, losing millions along the way. When cameras homed in on the 21-year-old, who was sitting next to his mother, Desiree Polingo, backstage, he was on the verge of tears. Alas, there were few friendly faces and nowhere to hide.
Aaron Rodgers represents a more common greenroom cautionary tale: In 2005 the Cal quarterback was haunted as he waited more than four anxious hours until the Packers picked him at No. 24. The pairing worked out, but Rodgers told ESPN in '13, "Unless you're going to be a first or second pick, I'd say, Stay home."
Once a player's name is called, it's a predictable routine: Walk across the stage to a roar from the crowd (usually cheers), pop on a hat and a jersey, then make a decision: handshake or bro-hug commissioner Roger Goodell. A few posed photos and a synopsis of college accomplishments follow, then it's on to the next team on the clock. When asked if it might reconsider the greenroom experience going forward, the NFL declined comment.
"People will view it however they want," says Smith. "But we want our players to understand [that while] their position in the NFL is a wonderful opportunity, they also have a brand and an identity that's separate from it."
After all, during those years of hard work, no player envisioned sitting in a nearly empty room with a camera in his face, trying not to let the realization of that boyhood dream turn into a nightmare.

Let’s do this one last time. For SI’s final 2017 mock draft, we divided the 32 teams between our two experts, Chris Burke and Emily Kaplan, and made them GMs for a day—with all the trading privileges that implies.​ It took all of six picks for things to get weird.

And so it begins ...

The draft is two days away, and by now you’re probably sick of hearing that Mitchell Trubisky is a hometown boy, Deshaun Watson is a winner, Christian McCaffrey is a jack of all trades and Myles Garrett likes dinosaurs.
But the draft extends well past the headliners; 253 players will be selected, and each has a story. Here are 50 lesser-known prospects you familiarize yourself with, whether because of their back story or their skill set, heading into the weekend.


Born amid a civil war in Sierra Leone, Darboh became an orphan when he was 2 years old and both his parents were killed. With a group of family members, Darboh traveled by foot to Gambia, then Senegal, where they found refuge. In 2001 he moved to Des Moines, Iowa, where he was sponsored by a family that eventually adopted him. On the field, he played in Michigan’s pro-style passing attack, and his length (6' 2" with 32 5/8-inch arms) is a plus.

Evans believes he can be the “next Dak Prescott.” That might take time. NFL evaluators were universally surprised when Evans declared early, which doesn’t bode well. A junior college transfer, he started one year for the Hokies, posted a 10-4 record and impressive numbers (3,456 passing yards, 29 touchdowns, 846 rushing yards on 204 carries). However, the one word most associated with 6' 3", 232-pound Evans: raw.




Joe Mixon has garnered most of the attention, but Perine has a chance to create some buzz. Oklahoma’s all-time leading rusher (he broke Billy Sims’ record, finishing with 4,122 career yards), Perine is strong (30 bench reps, best of all combine RBs), thick (5' 11", 233 pounds), and could be a workhorse back in the NFL. He shouldn’t go lower than Round 3; scouts adore him.

Ebukam was born in Nigeria and moved to America when he was 9 years old. He wasn’t invited to the combine but produced impressive testing numbers at his pro day. At 6' 2", 240 pounds, he has exceptionally long arms and has a knack for getting after the quarterback.

Remember this name. At 6' 4", 218 pounds, with 32-inch arms, Golladay is the type of prospect that, as scouts say, “looks the part.” He has a nice catch radius and, while he may need some refinement, could be a starter before you know it.

College football fans might remember this name from a strange and (at times) testy recruiting saga. A five-star recruit, Vanderdoes initially committed to Notre Dame. After he changed his allegiance to UCLA, citing a desire to be closer to his family, Irish coach Brian Kelly refused to release the defensive tackle from his national letter of intent. Vanderdoes eventually got his wish, and though he shined in his first two seasons, injury derailed a once-promising career. He’s still working his way back from ACL surgery in 2015; the team that drafts him will be banking that he will bounce back fully.

The short story: Without a scholarship offer coming out of high school, Reddick walked on at Temple. His mother took out a loan to pay for his meal plan. At one point coaches told Reddick he’d likely be cut. He persevered, earned a scholarship—while playing everything from defensive back to defensive end—and dominated at the Senior Bowl. His speed and athleticism will make him a fine NFL linebacker.

A mainstay on special teams for three years in Baton Rouge, Riley shined when he finally got his shot to start at linebacker: 93 tackles (nine for loss), 1.5 sacks and an interception. He’s a bit undersized, but hey, that’s what scouts said about Kwon Alexander and Deion Jones.

He’s a tad undersized at 5' 10" and 185, which will relegate him to the nickel (he got pushed around by some bigger receivers like Josh Reynolds at the Senior Bowl). But Kazee is quick and has excellent ball skills; he had 15 interceptions over the last two seasons. I like his scrappiness.

Ogunjobi was a 350-pound high school sophomore who loved video games. That concerned his parents; they hid his controllers and marched him to the football field. A first-generation American (his parents are Nigerian immigrants) Ogunjobi’s football IQ was nonexistent when he first hit the field. One year, a YMCA membership, and dozens of jogs around the neighborhood later, he shed nearly 100 pounds and earned a scholarship to Charlotte’s nascent program. Still raw but much fitter (6' 3", 305 pounds) Ogunjobi displays strength, good hand work and a game that’s constantly improving.





In a historic year for defensive backs—some evaluators project a whopping 20 corners/safeties within the first two rounds—this Boston College product has held his own. With experience at corner as well, Johnson has generated buzz for his athleticism and versatility; he could plug into any NFL scheme. Don’t be shocked if he’s taken on Day 2.

Utah’s all time sack leader (29.5) didn’t receive an invitation to Indianapolis, which baffled most folks in Utah. Dimick is a familiar name for Pac-12 fans, leading the conference in sacks (14.5) and tackles for loss (20) in 2016, but evaluators have concerns about whether the production will translate to the next level—specifically, scouts say Dimick’s short arms are worrisome.

He’s the first member of his family to attend college, and came out firing. As a freshman, Basham had 7.5 sacks despite starting only five of the Bobcats’ 13 games. With ideal size (6' 4", 269 pounds, 34 1/4-inch arms) and production (11.5 sacks, 16 tackles for loss in 2016), Basham is the best defensive prospect from a conference known to produce NFL gems.

Awuzie calls himself “a cornerback that thinks like a mike linebacker.” He recorded seven sacks over the last two seasons and in 2016 ranked second on the Buffaloes with 90 tackles. He’s tough, has a high football IQ and is versatile enough to fit in most schemes. He could sneak into the late first round (Green Bay or Pittsburgh are good fits).

When you hear people talk about depth in this year’s running back class, Mack is a reason why. He’s a dual threat that so many teams covet. In three years, he became USF’s career leader in rushing yards (3,609) and all-purpose yards (4,107). Oh, and touchdowns, too (33).


The grandson of former NFL general manager Bobby Beathard, the Iowa quarterback has been discussed as the late-round quarterback most likely to develop into a starter. In the Hawkeyes pro-style offense, Beathard stands strong in the pocket, processes well and demonstrates toughness (though his 59 sacks over the last two years are an eyesore). Says one AFC area scout: “He’s been up and down for me. Mechanics are good, arm strength O.K., but I’ll give him this: that’s a kid not afraid to take a hit.”

Rehkrow handled kicking duties at Idaho, but punting is where he shined. The four-year starter averaged 45.8 yards per punt (with a career-long of 73) but more impressively as a senior landed 26 of his 56 punts within the 20-yard line.

The Quebec native, 6' 5", 254 pounds, participated in his pro day 10 days after pulling his hamstring, and still managed a 4.82 40-time. After holding his own at the East-West Shrine game, he’s piqued the interest of several NFL teams.



A five-star high school recruit, Johnson could have gone anywhere, from Alabama to Notre Dame. The Pennsylvania native chose Pitt, where he became the school’s first, first-team All American offensive lineman since Ruben Brown. Smart, tough, and technically sound—in a weak year for o-lineman, Johnson could go as high as early second round.

This has become a draft trope: The Tigers produce a skilled wideout whose talent was never fully showcased because of LSU’s run-heavy offense (plus ineptitude at quarterback). See: Odell Beckham Jr., Jarvis Landry. Dupre and Dural are the latest examples. Dupre has better size, Dural has more speed. Both are likely mid-rounders.



Langley played two years at Georgia, but transferred to Lamar looking for more playing time and consistency. He got his wish, though the competition wasn’t great, and Langley looked a bit rusty at the Senior Bowl going against better receivers. Still, evaluators like his length (6' 0", 32-inch arms) and believe there’s a lot of upside.

You had to feel for Moreau last month when he tore his pectoral muscle while performing the bench press at his pro day. The likely Top-50 pick tumbled (surgery will sideline him four to six months). It was another devastating injury for Moreau, whose 2015 season was cut short by a Lisfranc fracture. When he’s healthy, Moreau is strong and explosive, and could reward any GM willing to exercise patience.

USC quarterback Sam Darnold wasn’t the only breakout star of the epic 2016 Rose Bowl. It was coming out party for this Penn State wideout, who has deceptive speed; let’s just say scouts were pleasantly surprised by 4.42 40 time. Like fellow Nittany Lion Allen Robinson, Godwin can make contested catches (check out his tape against Ohio State when he went up against first-round corner prospect Gareon Conley).

Samuel did a bit of everything for the Buckeyes, but he’ll need a more defined role in the NFL. (Part of the reason he was moved around: He was Ezekiel Elliott’s backup in 2015 and coaches wanted to find a way to get them both on the field at the same time). Samuel probably projects as a slot receiver for most teams, and he may need to refine his route-running a bit. There’s no question he adds a wrinkle to any offense with big play explosiveness.

In discussing the depth of this year’s corner class, Wilson is a name that comes to mind. He looks the part of a starting corner—good length, athletic, strong ball skills—but is only a one-year-starter, and his draft position will reflect that. (He missed most of 2015 with a torn ACL.) Had he stayed in school, an evaluator told me he could have been a first- or second-round candidate in 2018. A coaching switch—Tom Herman left for Texas—is one of the reasons he is said to have declared.

Jones is FBS’s all time career receptions leader (399), and set the single-season record last year (158). He’s played outside and in the slot, and though he might not see the same volume as in college, you don’t catch all of those passes without some skill. Evaluators also love Jones for his high character and NFL bloodlines—his father, Robert, was a linebacker for the Cowboys in the 1990s, and his uncle, Jeff Blake, was an NFL quarterback for 14 years.


He doesn’t have the size NFL teams are looking for (5' 11", 242 pounds, short arms) but he’s all heart. Harris was ridiculously productive in college, with 633 career tackles. Though his arms might make shedding blocks difficult, he could make a roster as a core special teamer. Switching to fullback is also an option.

He’s now being discussed as a potential Top-50 pick, but there are a few reasons Bowser (6' 3", 247 pounds) hasn’t been hyped until lately. For his first two years at Houston he also played basketball, meaning he couldn’t fully commit to football. He also missed the first four games of 2016 with a broken orbital bone. But over the past few months, evaluators have become enamored by his explosiveness and athleticism. He has experience dropping into coverage as a linebacker, and also has 21.5 career sacks. He should have no problem as a pass rusher in the NFL.

….you know where this one is going. It’s the NFL’s new favorite typecast. Everett didn’t play football until senior year of high school. He spent two years at JUCO until football programs took notice. He’s still raw and there are still questions about what type of receiver he can be, but he moves well and doesn’t shy from contact. A cool fact: He’ll be the first South Alabama player to be drafted.

T.J. Watt might hog the spotlight (not by choice; blame the last name), but anyone who watched the Badgers over the past few seasons knows there’s more talent on Wisconsin’s D. Biegel is an emotional, high-effort, high-production player. Though scouts hope he can add more bulk to his 6' 3" frame (plus there are concerns about the broken foot that sidelined him for some of 2016), Biegel could have an early impact next fall.



It was another mass exodus of underclassmen for the Buckeyes, and somehow lost in the mix is Brown. Of course, it’s easy to be overshadowed by first-round candidates Malik Hooker, Marshon Lattimore, Gareon Conley, et al… Evaluators might have preferred Brown stay in Columbus, and his draft status will reflect that. What the 6' 2", 222-pound wideout lacks in experience (only 52 targets in his college career) he makes up for in physicality and big-play potential.

He’s built like a running back (5' 11", 199 pounds) but crazy productive whenever he gets the ball. A breakdown of Henderson’s 23 touchdowns in 2016: 19 receiving, two rushing, two on kickoff returns. Though he’s injury prone, Henderson has proved he’s tough, playing through three games with a broken hand in 2016.

Malone says he believes he’s the top wideout in this class; evaluators peg him for the third or fourth round. The potential is there, though. Joshua Dobb’s go-to guy is tall (6' 2 3/4") with the speed to be a vertical threat.

It’s really not a good year for Rutgers prospects, and Cioffi might be the school’s best bet. The defensive back did a little bit of everything in the secondary (eight interceptions, three forced fumbles, 2.5 sacks) but most impressively started 47 of 48 games over four years. He’s a high-effort player, but likely needs to work up from undrafted free agent.

Scouts like the Iowa tight end because he’s physical and an advanced run blocker after playing in the Hawkeyes’ pro-style offense. He boosted his stock at the combine solid numbers on the jumps, plus a 4.52 40-yard dash—quite fast for a 247-pounder.

Recruited as a quarterback, Hodges made the switch in 2014. He’s the classic oversized wide receiver that thrives in today’s NFL. At 6' 6", 257 pounds, he’s a big play threat, especially dangerous in the red zone. He still needs work, but there is tons of upside. Think Jordan Reed.

With 15 tackles for loss, eight sacks, and three forced fumbles in 2015, Smoot was being discussed as a potential first rounder in 2016, especially after a season under long-time NFL head coach Lovie Smith. Instead, Smoot was extremely inconsistent. Some scouts wonder whether he simply benefitted from playing alongside Jihad Ward in ’15, others believe his size (6' 3", 263 pounds), athleticism (he was an excellent high school hurdler) and motor should not be ignored. He’s an intriguing early Day 2 pick.

Just as his title suggests, Evans has the range NFL coaches look for in a free safety. You’ll hear about how he missed some tackles at A&M, but he’s incredibly athletic and excellent in coverage.

Evaluators have had an eye on Lamp ever since he put together dominant tape against Alabama—especially in winning one-on-one battles against Jonathan Allen. Lamp was a left tackle in college (where he was a four-year starter) but could slide to guard.

Though he played for one of the SEC’s weaker programs, Cunningham topped the conference with 125 tackles in 2016. This is what a scout told me about Cunningham in October: “Long arms. Explosive with sideline-to-sideline speed. Natural when he drops into coverage. Converts speed into power as a tackler, but could use some improvement in finishing tackles.”

At 6' 1", 313 pounds, scouts wonder if he’s a two-down nose tackle or every-down lineman. Evaluations vary, but there’s no question Qualls can bolster a front seven. He has quick feet, thanks to a high school stint as a fullback, and an inspiring backstory—at one point, he was homeless.

He doesn’t have ideal size (6' 2", 245 pounds), he doesn’t have a great counter move, but there’s something about Adams that keeps reeling evaluators in. No doubt his athleticism is enticing with quick feet off the edge. He’s an overachiever whose story matches the improbable ascent of the Broncos under coach PJ Fleck.

Of course you’ve heard all about Myles Garrett, but his sidekick isn’t too shabby either. When I visited College Station a few weeks ago, Hall received serious praise from coach Kevin Sumlin. Hall, who previously played outside linebacker, has the length (6' 5", 35-inch arms), athleticism and traits to be successful in setting the edge, but he has only one year of defensive line experience. Some evaluators are concerned he may be a project, but he should be off the board by the end of Day 2.

* * *







* * *









* * *











* * *



* * *




* * *



* * *



* * *




* * *



* * *




* * *




* * *



* * *

* * *



* * *

* * *




* * *



* * *




* * *




* * *



* * *

* * *



* * *




* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *



* * *




* * *



* * *




* * *

* * *




* * *



* * *






He has the size (6' 3") and physicality to be a possession receiver, as well as the long, powerful strides that evoked Dez Bryant’s run-after-catch ability. He tied for the lead among all Division-I players with 19 touchdown catches and finished his career with an FBS record 5,285 receiving yards. The undefeated Broncos earned a Cotton Bowl berth (they lost to Wisconsin, though Davis, naturally, hauled in a TD in that game).
Throughout the draft process we have discussed three receivers poised to come off the board in the first round: Davis, Washington’s John Ross and Clemson’s Mike Williams. But quietly, Davis has become one of the most frustrating prospects in the 2017 class. It’s not that he has done anything to alter his stock since Western Michigan’s season ended on Jan. 1—it’s that he hasn’t done anything at all.

A few days after the season, Davis had surgery to repair two torn ligaments in his ankle. He declined his Senior Bowl invite. He attended the combine, but did not participate in any drills. Western Michigan’s pro day was March 15, and Davis sat out again. He has not been timed in the 40-yard dash and there’s a legitimate chance he won’t before the draft on April 27. Last week, Davis returned to Indianapolis for his medical re-check. Throughout the process, his camp has reiterated that it was only a minor surgery and that he should be good to go by mini-camps; results from Indianapolis last week should verify that.
“Corey Davis is a litmus test for the trust the tape crowd,” says one NFL personnel man. “You look at his tape and I think everyone agrees he’s a first-round grade but you’ll see how important the 40 time is for some. I think it varies from team to team.”
Particularly relevant: There was much ado about Williams’ time. He opted to only run at Clemson’s pro day, and it was a highly anticipated affair. (His hand-timed 4.49 was deemed good enough by evaluators.) Ross’s record-breaking 4.22 may have kept him in the first-round conversation.
Davis, like Williams, isn’t known for his speed, but a scout told me that a 4.50 or better from Davis would cement his status in the Top 15. As for trusting the tape: although Davis’s smooth route-running makes him look pro ready, there are some concerns about the level of competition he played against in the MAC. Although, when I visited him in September, Davis was quick to point out he has tape against top corners. “I’ve gone against Darqueze Dennard, Eli Apple…” he rattled off. (And he had 52 catches for 701 yards and 5 TDs in nine career games against Big Ten opponents.)
So could Davis drop because he hasn’t participated in a few drills? Different teams value different things. For example, last year, the Saints didn’t feel comfortable drafting Vonn Bell because they were missing times on some shuttle drills. Sean Payton personally asked Bell, and the safety filmed himself doing the drills and texted the videos to Payton. New Orleans traded up to draft Bell at No. 61.
Davis’s case is slightly different, and the 40 is generally the most important test, especially for skill positions. Says another NFL evaluator: “I still think Corey Davis is a first-round pick. But I’d be a lot more sure about it there weren't holes to fill in.”
* * *

* * *








* * *


For his Week 1 game against Wisconsin, I watched everything Fournette did when he wasn’t running ball. The crux: The NFL has long known Fournette is a generational talent as a runner. But how would he be scouted during the 2016 season, what attributes matter to NFL teams, and how does he grade out?




In an early-season quest to identify “The Next Carson Wentz,” I profiled Gustafson, the 6' 7" passer from Montana. Perhaps the storyline was a bit too convenient; a fellow FCS product, Gustafson beat Wentz in his first career start.




I delved into the unique pressures of being a Notre Dame quarterback and asked former Fighting Irish signal callers if Kizer would be the guy to finally break through. (While many Notre Dame quarterbacks have been drafted high, Joe Montana was the last true NFL star).




I spent a morning shadowing the Western Michigan wide receiver to see what it was like being big man on campus.




Watt overcame a serious injury, switched from tight end to linebacker, and quickly announced himself as a disruptive playmaker at Wisconsin. When I visited him in Madison I quickly learned something: He’s exactly like his big brother.

Two evaluators said that if the 6-foot-5, 243-pound junior enters this year’s draft, he will have, at minimum, a second-round grade.



Widely regarded as the country’s most talented senior quarterback (though a bit erratic) I detailed Kelly’s checkered past. With his uncle, Hall of Famer Jim Kelly, as an advocate, I wrote that Kelly had six months to convince NFL teams he could be trusted.

The bigger concerns rise when teams look off the field.
“I do think there are legitimate concerns off the field. If you’re going to take him, especially if you’re going to take him high, you’re really going to need to ask: Does this guy get it?”



Setting the table for what could be a historic class of tight ends.




In a weak class of offensive linemen, the All Pac-12 tackle with a rare frame could be a Top 50 pick, but evaluators have concerns that he can manage his weight, as well as his athleticism.




Getting to know the then-relatively-unknown UNC quarterback as his stock soared.




For the national championship game against Alabama, I asked a panel of quarterback experts (long-time coach Mike Shanahan, then-Browns QB Josh McCown, and retired star Randall Cunningham) to share their thoughts on Watson.




A profile of the Washington speedster (before his record-setting combine run).

“It’s funny,” says his Washington position coach, Bush Hamdan, who last week was hired as the Atlanta Falcons’ new quarterbacks coach, “John Ross lives in this world with flashy guys and big names. But really, he’s just this sweet, gentle kid. I’m going to miss him like hell as a player. But I’ll miss him three times as much as a person.”



* * *




Well, I hope Shanahan doesn’t have to wait a full six years to find his quarterback! I see your point, and the 49ers—a handful of pieces away from being competitive—certainly don’t have to rush into anointing a quarterback of the future. They have veteran Brian Hoyer secured for 2017 and are fully aware Kirk Cousins could become available in 2018. So using a mid-round pick on a developmental prospect, like Dobbs, makes a lot of sense. At Tennessee, Dobbs proved he is a gifted runner and playmaker outside of the pocket. While Shanahan and his father created what I consider the greatest single-season game plan in recent memory in catering to Robert Griffin III in 2012, I expect Dobbs to have to adapt to becoming more typical drop back passer in the NFL. I believe Dobbs has shown enough accuracy (especially on deep balls) to make the switch. But most importantly, I think he possesses the off-field intangibles; he’ll be a student of the game. If Shanahan and Co. determine they are committed to Dobbs, I believe he could be a serviceable starter in the NFL in two or three years. Top 10 might be a stretch.

It’s funny, it feels like almost every team in the Top 10 is looking to trade down. Will any deals materialize? I think the key spot to look at is the Bills at No. 10. Many teams believe Buffalo is looking to draft a quarterback, and therefore if a team has fallen in love with either Mitchell Trubisky or Deshaun Watson, they could try to leapfrog ahead of the Bills to snag their guy. In fact, the most likely trade scenario in the first round is a team trading up to get a quarterback—I even get the sense that could happen later in the first round as well, with Patrick Mahomes. I don’t think anyone will trade up to get Leonard Fournette. I do think he is going in the Top 10 though. My prediction for Fournette is the Jaguars (No. 4) or Panthers (No. 8).

It’s quite possible. As I said in the previous question, the key spot here is Buffalo at No. 10. The Bills could just be sending smokescreens and don’t intend to draft any of the top passers. But if they do—or if they have scared other quarterback-needy teams into thinking they are—then the first quarterback off the board should occur around their spot.





The car broke down on a highway just outside of Kansas City. Calvin Willis, who spent his life working in body shops, mostly as a detailer, pulled over to give the man a jump.
A few months later, Willis stopped by the local middle school to enroll his children. The man with the car trouble was in the hallway filling up water jugs; he was the school’s football coach and recognized Willis as the good Samaritan. They began talking and soon, Willis had signed up one of his sons, 11-year-old Jordan, to play football.
A decade later, Jordan Willis isn’t the fastest riser in the 2017 draft class, but he’s perhaps the steadiest riser. He is in Tampa meeting with the Buccaneers today, one of his 15 private workouts or team visits, and it seems feasible he could sneak into the first round. A 6' 4", 255-pound pass rusher from Kansas State—a defensive end who could transition to a 3-4 outside linebacker—Willis made a statement at the combine with a 4.53 40 time (best of all defensive linemen) and 39-inch vertical leap (second to Myles Garrett). At his pro day, he moved seamlessly between linebacker and defensive line drills, quashing concerns he appeared stiff on film. Scouts routinely compliment Willis on his hand work, a byproduct of working with Hall of Fame offensive lineman Will Shields, one of his mentors. Willis is a darling of Pro Football Focus, which ranked his 80 total quarterback pressures in 2016 as second most in the country. A three-year starter, Willis graduated third in Kansas State history with 26 career sacks.
“I literally don’t think I can identify when he made the biggest jump,” says Mark Simoneau, the former Kansas State and NFL linebacker who now owns a private gym, and has trained Willis since high school. “He’s consistently improved every single year.” Texted one area scout who has studied Willis: “He’s mature. Good work ethic. Shouldn’t have many problems adapting to next level.” And while the story of how Willis discovered football is a sweet anecdote, it’s also a peek into the upbringing that helped him get here.
* * *
Calvin Willis has polished hoods and removed scratches at the same body shop for 20 years, and every time he made more money, he moved his family to a better situation. (The body shop, by the way, is owned by Rick Hendrick, the owner of Hendrick Motorsports, which explains why Jordan Willis is a big NASCAR fan). Jordan is one of 11 children—four older brothers and two older sisters, three younger brothers and one younger sister—and he has moved a total of six times, including switching grade schools twice and middle schools twice, all across greater Kansas City. “I got a lot of diversity,” he says. “Whether it was a social education when we lived in the inner city, and I had a private education as well, so I got a wide variety of different experiences.”
As a sophomore at Rockhurst, an all-boys prep school, Willis asked his coach how he could get to college. Just got to satellite camps, he was told. Kansas State happened to host a camp at a nearby high school, Willis attended, and soon he was being courted by the Wildcats. They made an offer and Willis accepted, before he had ever played a varsity snap. When other schools sent letter of interests, Willis remained loyal to the Wildcats.
In high school Willis was so quiet that his football teammates never nominated him as captain. Yet the rest of the student body sensed his leadership; they elected him as student body president. “If I’m not playing football, I want to go into coaching,” says Willis. “But if it was a job outside of football, I would go into politics. But I would want to go into local politics, because I would want to actually affect people.”
At Kansas State, Willis thrived in Bill Snyder’s structured program. In December, Willis became the first member of his family to graduate college. Snyder gave seniors the day off, however Willis was torn. His ceremony began exactly at the same time as practice. His parents drove from Kansas City to Manhattan, and Willis made them wait all day. “We were preparing for a bowl game, and it was my last bowl game,” Willis explains. “We had lost the previous two and so this was important to me. Plus, I had got some postseason accolades and I didn’t want to have an award hangover type deal. That’s not who I am.” (Willis did share a celebratory meal with his parents at Chili’s that night.)
The first signal Willis would ascend this draft season came at the Senior Bowl weigh in, when scouts buzzed about his physique. “He’s the guy who has never missed a workout,” says Simoneau. “Never. Not one, not for any reason.” Willis shined in one-on-one drills and in the showcase, earning the South team’s Most Outstanding Player honors with two sacks, two forced fumbles and a pass breakup.
In speaking to Willis, you are struck by his maturity. He has a deep, calm voice that makes him seem far older than 21. He also speaks with a sensibility rare for draft prospects. On why he didn’t feel nervous at the combine: “You know how high you can jump, you know how fast you can run. So just do it.”
On how he sells himself to teams: “I don't tell teams I think I'm the best pass rusher in the draft. I tell them I'm consistent with my pass rush ability, and I have a variety of things that I can do. Of course there are things I can work on, but for the most part I have a knack for affecting the quarterback. I try to explain to people my goal is not to sack the quarterback or even be a great pass rusher. My goal is to affect the quarterback. so if that's getting him off his spot making him float his a little bit, that’s my job.”

* * *






* * *





Is there a lot of ill will for Clemson because that championship loss? There’s always going to be ill will [after losing] a game in Tuscaloosa or anywhere in Alabama. We lost to Auburn one year and we had fans poisoning trees. The year of the “Kick-6,” somebody was at an Iron Bowl party and an Alabama fan shot and killed an Auburn fan. It’s big down there when you lose a game. That’s what I don’t think he understood and that’s what I was trying to tell him. This is all these people got. I don’t feel like he was there picking a fight, he seemed like a good dude.

* * *






COLLEGE STATION, Texas — Last week marked the busiest bunch of pro days this month, as NFL evaluators were dispatched to Ann Arbor, Berkeley, Chapel Hill, Columbus, Los Angeles, Palo Alto and South Bend—some making two, even three stops in a three-day span. We’ll hit highlights from each of those sessions, through the eyes of scouts who were on the ground, but we begin this column in College Station.
Texas A&M holds its pro day on Wednesday, the final public exhibition for presumed No. 1 overall pick Myles Garrett. The Browns may not send much of a contingent; they’ve already conducted a private workout with the defensive end.

On film, Garrett’s explosiveness led to dozens of pressures; he had a knack for diagnosing plays and bursting into the backfield. He steadily improved against the run. He recorded 32.5 sacks in three seasons, despite battling an ankle injury in 2016. His ceiling feels limitless once Garrett refines a few pass rush moves.

When NFL evaluators visited College Station over the past three years, they have asked: What type of competitor is Garrett? The answers, and examples, are emphatic.
* * *
Last week, I spent time with Texas A&M offensive lineman Jermaine Eluemunor (for a longer project, which I’m excited to share soon). He joked: “I credit Myles for me redshirting my first year here. He just dogged me in that first practice. Picked me up and threw me.” Eluemunor detailed how his star teammate became his practice adversary. Of course, coaches knew what kind of athlete Garrett was when he walked on campus. He was 18 years old and had what teammates describe as an eight pack. He’s a once-in-a-generational type talent. “But we’d get after it at practice,” Eluemunor says. “He’d fight, but fight with a smile on his face. Because he loved it.”
I asked A&M coach Kevin Sumlin about Garrett as a competitor. “People take for granted his injury status,” Sumlin says. “A lot of guys would have just shut it down and just not played.” Sumlin pointed to one game: an Oct. 28, double-overtime battle between then-No. 8 Texas A&M and then-No. 9 Tennessee at Kyle Field. Garrett had missed the previous week’s game with a leg injury.
“He probably shouldn’t have played against Tennessee,” Sumlin says. “He wasn’t going to miss that game for anything. We started off with, O.K., he’ll just play third downs and rush the passer, and that was the plan because we had a whole season to go. And you look up, and it’s overtime, and I go, ‘What are you doing?’ And he goes, ‘I’m not coming out.’ So he played both overtimes.”
Sumlin continued: “That speaks to a couple things. He loves the game. As great of an athlete as he is, he’s an even better competitor and even better teammate. He wasn’t 100 percent, he was still very effective, and that said a lot to his teammates who he is, that said a lot to our fans, but I think it also said a lot to GMs and people at the next level that he was really hurt. But to play and not shut it down and say, ‘Hey, I can just wait for the draft,’ says a lot about what type of player he is. What people saw on Saturday was just a snapshot of what went on during the week, during camp, during Myles’ time here.”
NFL evaluators, especially the Browns, seem to understand that. It’s why more likely than not, Garrett will hear his name called first on April 27.

* * *









* * *





* * *





* * *







If any of this sounds outlandish, imagine how ESPN’s Mel Kiper assesses a modern landscape littered with mocks. The godfather of NFL draft coverage, Kiper produced his first mock draft in 1978, as a community college freshman. He sold 100 issues of his draft guide, then quit school. A few other draft publications, such as Pro Football Weekly, included mocks at the time—but Kiper willed the niche into the mainstream.
“People talk more about the draft than NFL games,” Kiper says. “And for many people, how they talk about the draft is through mock drafts.”
If the NFL draft is the most popular non-sporting event in sports, mocks are the primary vehicle for the hype. This is not an industry secret: No matter the time of year, no matter the author, mock drafts draw a huge audience.
“If I wrote a thoughtful piece about how we marginalize black quarterbacks in scouting, people would read it,” says Matt Miller of Bleacher Report. “But 10 times the amount of people might read my mock draft.”
Adds Todd McShay, Kiper’s ESPN teammate: “I’m always mildly surprised by how many people read these things. But I know I shouldn’t be.”
And NFL Network’s Daniel Jeremiah says: “When I made the transition from scouting to the media, I learned to never read comments on anything I write. And for the love of god, never, ever read the comments on a mock draft.”

* * *
Mock drafts will always carry the stigma of a work-from-your-basement industry; wannabe analysts filling in Mad Libs. Insert some jargon, add a little bit of recycled wisdom citing trends, and make a series of educated guesses.
“I think my 3-year-old could make a pretty good draft,” Miller says. “I mean, picking out of a hat, you’d probably get a few right.” Insiders have legitimized the practice by picking up the phone and checking in with sources, and yet the distinction is still muddled.
Perhaps as confusing as why people like them is why they exist in the first place (besides the aforementioned traffic numbers). The editor of this column, Gary Gramling, likes to say a mock draft sets a baseline for fan expectations. NFL front offices conduct dozens of mocks; it helps project the market.
“I do see some benefit in going through the exercise,” says Jeremiah. “It’s easy to flippantly say, This guy is a first-round pick, this is guy is a second rounder. But when you put names to teams, including team needs, it’s like, Hold up, not all of these guys can go in the first round.”
Adds McShay: “I’ve always said, Chris Mortensen and [Adam] Schefter, the scoop guys, they should be doing these things if you want them to be most accurate.”

“I got so many letters,” he says. “I had to write people back. Having to explain myself became burdensome.” So Kiper benched his opinion. Miller, who also ranks the top 300 players based off his own tape study, says his rankings are his eyes and his mock drafts are his ears. Jeremiah, too, produces a popular top 50 ranking.

Not that it matters. Readers will inevitably get upset.

* * *
A romantic might say the mock draft’s popularity is rooted in unbridled optimism. Just as, each August, hope springs eternal at training camp, approaching the draft, mocks give you a sense that your team could be one piece away.
A cynic’s alternative: America loves listicles.
Theories are sprinkled across the spectrum.
“Mock drafts are popular because the audience is larger,” McShay says. “It’s the intersection of college and NFL fans.”
“It has a fantasy football vibe to it,” Jeremiah says. “You’re trying to match up [players and teams] and see how many you get right.”
“Fans love mock drafts because it’s almost more fun than the draft,” says Kiper. “Like Christmas, it’s all about the speculation. You know you’re going to get a gift, but you wonder, Will it be perfect? Will it fit right?”
“I grew up in Cleveland,” says Kadar. “So the draft is our Super Bowl.”
Surmises Miller: “It’s the same reason we follow election polls. You want your thoughts to be validated by someone in the know.”
It’s not just fans tuning in.
“I'll get guys [in the NFL] calling me saying, ‘Bro we’re not taking that guy,’” Jeremiah says. “Most of them will deny it publicly, but they all read that stuff.”
And Jeremiah’s usual response: “That’s fine. I don’t really care who you take.”
It’s not as much apathy as a resignation that perfect prognostication is near impossible—especially on Jan. 19, when Jeremiah’s Mock Draft 1.0 was released. (Consider how much has changed in these two months—from the combine to pro days to teams addressing needs in free agency.) “But, it’s good for the website,” Jeremiah says. “No use complaining about it, just do it and move on.”
For those who are lukewarm on mock drafts, there is only one thing worse. “There is no way I would ever do draft grades,” McShay says. “Maybe three or five years later you could retroactively look, but how can you assess a grade before any of the guys play a down?”
And so when McShay balked at that assignment, editors offered an alternative—as McShay views it, a tradition unlike any other. “It’s my least favorite activity,” he says. “But probably does the best of anything I write.”
On Wednesday, May 3, he will publish his first mock draft for 2018.
* * *










* * *


Run blocking is my thing. For a 323-pound guy I move very well. I'm athletic, very strong in the run game, very quick in the pass game. Right now I’m working on foot speed. I feel like my foot speed is just O.K. now, but I know I can move better. I'm trying to play more in control. I like to be physical, go for those kill blocks, and sometimes I don’t play in control of my body.

My parents got divorced when I was young, and growing up, I hadn’t really talked to him much because of that. We’re family, and right now it’s kind of a big brother professional type deal where he’ll check in on me. He texted me when I was going to college, he told me ‘just go to work.’ He did the same thing when I was going to the combine. I’ll text him every now and again for advice. He’s a good reminder of who I represent, what I represent, so that’s pretty cool.

I heard a lot of stuff about my age. I’m 24 years old. I’ll be a 25-year-old rookie. A lot of people see it as a negative, but what I’ve told teams is... because I’ve matured, because I’m not a 20-, 21-year-old younger guy, I’m all about my business. I'm a grown man who is not about partying, I'm about doing my job and providing for my family.

Really? I guess I should use him as a good example.

It was more of a funny question. In my meeting with the 49ers, Kyle Shanahan asked me how in the hell I married my wife because she’s way too good-looking. I thought it was hilarious. I told him I definitely outkicked my coverage, my wife is way more attractive than I am so, lucky me.
* * *

Here are his results, according one scout in attendance, and how that would rank among those at the combine:






Many teams still view Heiman as a future fullback in the pros but would give him a chance to play linebacker first. No matter, after his pro day performance, it seems increasingly likely that Heiman will get a shot to compete for an NFL roster spot this summer.

* * *



(Two questions, both related.) Though the Falcons return a lot—the biggest loss is Kyle Shanahan—the defensive front seven could use depth. There’s a great young core, centered around Vic Beasley, Grady Jarrett and Deion Jones, but (1) The Falcons want more speed, and (2) Most general managers adhere to this rule: You need three pass-rushers to be successful. Free agent Dontari Poe should help clog things up as a run defender, but he’s only on a one-year deal. Versatile defensive end Jack Crawford, another free-agent addition, is due for a rotational role. However, these signings might allow GM Thomas Dimitroff to be patient in identifying the right pass-rusher to pair and grow with Beasley, and instead go for one of two other positions in the first two rounds: safety (to pair with Keanu Neal) or guard. In fact, that’s a perfect transition into our next question…






Upon arriving in Mobile, Ala. in January, I asked Senior Bowl executive director Phil Savage if he believed any quarterbacks were poised to break out during the week.
“Davis Webb,” Savage, the former Cleveland Browns GM, said without hesitation.

In January, Webb flew into Mobile two days earlier than his Senior Bowl peers to adjust his body clock, and he arranged a throwing session with local University of South Alabama receivers. As you learn more about the 22-year-old Webb, stories like this become common. He’s the son of a coach and after his playing career wants to be a coach himself. When he watches football on TV, he splays out 50 index cards in front of him, scribbling down plays he likes. He has already built the framework for his eventual coaching playbook—down to situational red-zone plays—in a binder he keeps at home. He had keys to the high school gym, and janitors found Webb running cone drills past 9 p.m. more than once. He packed up his car the day after Texas Tech graduation—under NCAA rules, a player who receives his undergraduate degree and has eligibility remaining can transfer to another program to pursue a master's without sitting out a year—and drove the 20 hours to Berkeley with his mom so he could get started as soon as possible. He out-clocked a few coaches in the Cal football building, self-imposing a 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. workday. He rehearses play-calls in the mirror. He stayed up an extra two to three hours at Senior Bowl practices to study the exhibition game playbook.
Says Jake Spavital, Webb’s offensive coordinator at Cal: “Sometimes you hear all of this and say, Alright, you’re probably full of s---. Sure, he’s always up at the offices, and always working and all of that. But when you do the research, and a lot of NFL teams are, you start seeing it. And you say: Damn, this kid is the real deal.”

* * *
Webb completed his goal at the combine: He wanted to finish top-five in every category. He had a terrific throwing session, highlighting his arm strength on vertical routes while shrinking the gap between himself and the presumed top four—DeShone Kizer, Mahomes, Deshaun Watson and Mitchell Trubisky. “But the interviews were my best part,” Webb said in a phone interview last week.
This was the second time Webb met with many teams—the first being the Senior Bowl—and his football obsession and ultraconfident personality resonated. Webb is so personable, it can be mistaken as inauthentic. One scout was surprised that one month after chatting with the quarterback in Mobile, Webb addressed him by name in Indianapolis. But these traits trace back to Webb’s upbringing.
Webb’s father, Matt, coached high school football in suburban Dallas. He switched schools five times—according to Davis, always accepting better job offers—and so Webb cheered for five different schools, himself switching schools once. “I’ve kind of become used to making new friends,” he says. He attended a Texas Tech camp his sophomore year of high school, and fell in love with the program. On the drive home, Webb pledged to his father that he would make Lubbock his home. When Tech offered a scholarship, Webb told his other suitors (among them: Iowa, TCU) to back off. He committed the same day.
By the second day of spring ball Webb was practicing in the first-team huddle. He switched off with incumbent Michael Brewer, fully supplanting him as starter by the bowl game. (Brewer would transfer to Virginia Tech; Webb’s emergence also pushed Baker Mayfield out to Oklahoma). Webb, as a freshman, won the Holiday Bowl MVP, leading the Red Raiders to a 37-23 upset over No. 16 Arizona State, completing 28 of 40 passes (to 10 different targets) for 403 yards and four scores.
A dark-horse Heisman candidate, Webb started the first eight games of 2014 before a season-ending ankle injury in October. A few weeks later he underwent surgery on his shoulder from an injury in September. As Webb sat out, coach Kliff Kingsbury inserted a true freshman, Patrick Mahomes. Webb’s trajectory was suddenly thrown out of whack.
In 2015, Mahomes won the starting job in camp. “I feel like I never really got the chance to compete,” Webb says. Factoring into Kingsbury’s decision: Mahomes had two years of eligibility on Webb.

Webb stayed in the top pack of conditioning drills. He lifted like a linebacker. He made himself available to freshmen (Need help with a move? Want to go over plays?). He was now leading the No. 2 huddle and took pride in working with the younger players. “And the next year, it was so fun watching [wideouts] Keke Coutee and Jonathan Giles have a great year with Patrick [Mahomes],” Webb says. “Because I felt like I had a hand in their development.”
By December, the worst-kept secret in Lubbock became official: Webb would transfer.

* * *
Webb chose Cal over Colorado, with Spavital’s arrival as offensive coordinator being one of the biggest factors. A quick primer for those who don’t follow college football:
In 2008, Kevin Sumlin became head coach at Houston and, with offensive coordinator Dana Holgorsen, helped Case Keenum become one of the most prolific passers in NCAA history. Kingsbury was a quality control coach who worked closely with Keenum. In 2009, Spavital was hired as a grad assistant. Sumlin and Kingsbury brought their offense to Texas A&M in 2012. Spavital moved briefly to West Virginia with Holgorsen (helping groom Geno Smith), then joined the Aggies in 2013 for the prime of Johnny Manziel.
“I’m really close with Kliff, and we’ve always traded tape,” Spavital says. “Every single week we trade tape. He critiques me, I critique him. Throughout the year when Davis was the starter, I was like, This guy is really good. Kliff spoke so highly of him. He said he has one of the better arms you’ll ever see. Though Kliff went with Pat Mahomes, it was kind of like just giving it to the hot hand. He never thought anything less of Davis.”
And so when Spavital took the Cal job, Webb followed. It was a perfect match. Spavital was going to install his offense (which, according to Spavital, is essentially the same as Kingsbury’s with a few variations) and had an incoming quarterback with a base knowledge. The transition from the farmlands of Lubbock to one of the most liberal campuses in the U.S. was jarring. Knowing his grad transfer was essentially a six-month audition for NFL scouts, Webb accelerated the process. He wanted to know every player on the team, their hometown, their hobbies. “I didn’t want to look at it like memorization or trying to suck up,” Webb says. “I just tried to be as human as possible.” If he sat with a group of five offensive linemen for breakfast, he’d join wide receivers for lunch. He even got to know defensive players. Within two months of being on campus, Webb was named a captain (a badge he proudly reminds NFL interviewers).
“For six months, we pretty much lived together,” Spavital says. “He was in the office so much he forced me to get in there too. If he liked a certain concept, even if I wasn’t the biggest fan of it, I still put it in because the kid did his homework.” Webb and Spavital did a few studies on footwork. They broke down just about every NFL quarterback’s tape. Webb’s mechanics were already pretty sound—he’s been tutored by George Whitfield in offseason, and is a veteran of Elite 11 camps—and his arm talent is undeniable. Webb has a quick release, to the point where sometimes it feels like he’s just flicking the ball. Though Spavital’s offense is different from the one Goff ran a year earlier, it has enough similarities that evaluators talking themselves into Webb have pointed to this:
Webb’s final season at Cal: 61.6% completions, 4,295 yards, 37 touchdowns, 12 interceptions.
Goff’s final season at Cal: 64.5% completions, 4,714 yards, 43 touchdowns and 13 interceptions.
“I’ve known Jared for a long time, because of Elite 11 camps, and I think comparisons are O.K., but we are different leaders, different quarterbacks,” Webb says. “Jared is a little more laid back. I can be laid back, but I’m pretty high strung.”

Their bond was so strong, Spavital treated Webb like a grad assistant. “He was the only player I’ve ever allowed to run my meetings on Friday,” Spavital says. “I’m used to splitting my meetings in half. I let him have one, and let him run it. He made cutups throughout the week of things he wanted to show the skill players. I met with the entire unit at night.”
Spavital is now back at West Virginia with Holgorsen. “Davis will end up being my fifth quarterback to enter the NFL,” Spavital says (the others: Keenum, Manziel, Smith and Brandon Weeden). “Everyone has their own path, but the kids who put their whole life into the game, you root for those kids.”
* * *
There’s an old adage in scouting circles: trust the tape. A mediocre 40 time? Just so-so on the bench press? If he’s impressive on tape, he’ll be impressive for you. Alabama’s Jonathan Allen is Exhibit A for the “trust the tape” crowd.
UConn’s Obi Melifonwu? Consider him the opposite. Melifonwu blew up the combine. Scouts buzzed about his agility and quickness in position drills. At 6' 4" and 224 pounds, with 32.5-inch arms, Melifonwu blazed through the 40 in 4.40 seconds, leapt 11 feet, 9 inches in the broad jump and, most impressively, posted a 44-inch vertical, catapulting himself into the first-round conversation.
“He never flashed that high-point ability on tape,” said one evaluator. Indeed, while Northeast scouts had flagged the safety by his sophomore year, Melifonwu’s stock was always muddled by inconsistent film. He improved in each of his four years as a starter, but never generated the hype surrounding him now. “Scouts were on him very, very early. I just think they were trying to play coy to angle themselves appropriately,” says Bob Diaco, who was the head coach at UConn for Melifonwu’s final three seasons. “Not only did Obi have a strong Senior Bowl, but he did what everyone who knew him knew he was capable of at the combine in terms of his testing numbers. Now the cat is out of the bag. Obi is the best safety available in this draft.”
Diaco is right about the Senior Bowl being a pivotal moment for Melifonwu’s draft-season ascent. Some scouts who believed Melifonwu looked stiff on film commented on how well he moved in person. UConn, quietly, has had six defensive backs drafted over the last nine years—most notably Byron Jones, the Cowboys’ first-rounder in 2015. (In fact, Melifonwu’s 11-9 broad jump is second-best by a defensive back since 2003, only trailing Jones’ record leap of 12-3 in 2015.) Diaco said Melifonwu made the biggest jump between his sophomore and junior seasons, specifically during his junior season “the light just turned on.”
According to Diaco, Melifonwu spent “a massive amount of time” with then-Huskies defensive coordinator Anthony Poindexter, who was a star safety at the University of Virginia. “I think Obi was always a freakish athlete,” Diaco says. “There was just a level of physical conditioning and mental conditioning he needed to do to unlock it.”
So here’s what NFL evaluators will have to decide: Can you trust those traits will translate?

* * *





* * *







* * *








Rosenthal’s story went viral. The Associated Press synopsized the essay, as did People magazine, the Daily Mail and numerous other outlets. “Good Morning America” and the “Today” show did segments. The story has been shared tens of thousands of times on social media.


So when the 23-year-old heard earlier this year that Rosenthal was sick—the message was relayed through Patriots owner Robert Kraft by a friend of the author—Mitchell was crushed. The day after the Super Bowl, in which Mitchell caught six passes for 70 yards, he sat down, placed his iPhone on a tripod and pressed play.
“Hey Amy, this is Malcolm Mitchell of the world champion New England Patriots,” he says in the video. “I just wanted to spend some time and tell you… thank you.” 
Mitchell says his passion for reading only really began in college. In 2013 he tore his ACL celebrating teammate Todd Gurley’s touchdown and underwent surgery, missing a total of 16 games over two seasons. As he rehabbed, he made a local Barnes & Noble his haunt. There, he was invited to join a monthly book club—the only male in the group, and the youngest member by at least 20 years. In the ensuing years, reading became an increasingly important part of his life.
A fourth-round pick of the Patriots in 2016, Mitchell was the only no-show among the rookies invited by the NFLPA to a marketing symposium in Los Angeles. He said he didn’t want to take time away from learning the Patriots playbook. He did have time to lead his foundation, Read With Malcolm, which promotes the power of reading to underprivileged children. And then he became a protagonist in one of the most elaborate sports tales of all time.
“Everything kind of exploded after the Super Bowl,” Mitchell says. “People fell in love, not only with the story, but with the message I was trying to send, that reading is a way to reach your goals.”
Last week Mitchell was handed the keys to his hometown of Valdosta, Ga. The city of 54,000 declared March 6 “Malcolm Mitchell Day.” He has spoken to dozens of schools and boasts about an elementary-school student he met last year who raised his reading speed from 10 words per minute to 80. The boy made such strides that he co-emceed a literacy luncheon with Mitchell in February. “He’s even learning French!” Mitchell says. “I don’t even know French.”
In late March, Mitchell will host 11 events over seven days at bookstores and libraries in New England. He was invited to join former First Lady Barbara Bush for a reading event this spring but had to decline—he’d already committed to another reading event on that day.

And he has always circled back to Rosenthal, whom he has never met. Mitchell was raised by a single mom, Pratina Woods. In 2000, Woods was diagnosed with breast cancer. Mitchell remembers his mom often being tired, and always wearing bandanas because she was losing her hair from her treatment, which ultimately sent her cancer into remission. Mitchell and his siblings surrounded their mother with support during her battle, so he knows what Rosenthal and her family are going through.
Friends of Rosenthal, now in hospice care, report that she has been overwhelmed by the reaction to her Times piece. And she has been touched by the gesture of one professional football player.
Mitchell concluded his video message with these words: “Your book ‘Exclamation Mark’ … changed my outlook on life. It taught me that it doesn’t matter who you are or where you’re from—there is a place in this world for you. You just have to stay strong and keep moving forward. So I just wanted to credit you for having an impact on my life. I wanted to spend some time to say thank you. I want to thank you again for pulling for us, and I want you to know I’m definitely pulling for you.”

 

CARLSBAD, Calif. — First it was the video from spring ball: Patrick Mahomes coolly executing a no-look pass. “Doing his best Aaron Rodgers impersonation,” Texas Tech coach Kliff Kingsbury posted on Twitter. A few weeks later, another video surfaced: Mahomes, both knees on the turf, launching a perfect spiral 65 yards. It felt as if everyone around Mahomes was trying to sell the skeptics on his talent.

The 21-year-old has the rugged frame (6' 3", 230 pounds), the MLB-caliber arm (literally) and enough charisma to convince teams he can buck a growing list of Air Raid flops. In the past six months, he has risen to become a legitimate first-round option. “I think people will have to wonder if they’re talking themselves into loving him because it’s a generally weak class,” says an AFC personnel man. “But as you watch his tape, you see this kid has traits that are just special. His footwork needs work and there are mechanical issues to sort out, but his potential is exciting.”
Mahomes has the face of a teenager but carries himself like a much older man. He maintains eye contact and talks fast; his Texas drawl is accentuated by unrelenting energy. And as he details his journey, you’re inclined to believe every promise he makes. For his entire life, Mahomes has been precociously assertive.
“It’s understandable why people would think I’m just another Air Raid guy, not ready for [the pros],” he says. “Quarterbacks who came from our system haven’t done well in the NFL; that’s a fact.
“At the combine, I am going to show NFL teams that I am ready to play Day 1. Everyone knows I can make the throws, but I’m smarter than people think. I know these NFL concepts. I’m not a project.”
* * *
Before the gridiron, there was the diamond. Mahomes was born in September 1995 when his father, Pat Mahomes Sr., was in the final weeks of his fourth season with the Minnesota Twins.
The elder Mahomes, a 6' 4" right-hander, would pitch seven more seasons for five different teams in the majors, and bounced around the minor leagues for another five seasons after that. Little Pat followed. When he was 2 ½, the family moved to Puerto Rico for winter ball, bunking with his godfather, LaTroy Hawkins. Hawkins spent 21 seasons in the majors, first as a top prospect in the starting rotation, then as a shutdown reliever. And for one winter, he served as Little Pat’s personal waiter.

“He knew there was a Burger King across the street,” Hawkins says. “And he knew it was open 24 hours.” Hawkins usually obliged. Pat ate the fries, then fell back asleep immediately. Their bond remained strong, Hawkins serving as a mentor as Little Pat became a star in his own right.
Mahomes spent the school year in East Texas and summers on the road. He took batting practice with Alex Rodriguez, fielded ground balls with Derek Jeter. “Now that I’m older I realize that stuff wasn’t normal,” he says. When he was 9, Mahomes not only made the 11-and 12-year-old travel team, he was the starting shortstop.
When Mahomes Sr. retired from baseball and began coaching youth basketball, his son was the star. But in seventh grade, Mahomes began playing football, invigorating a passion.

“My dad played football in high school, he was all-state, but he never really loved it,” Mahomes says. “But for me, football was my love.”
Hawkins wanted Mahomes to make the best decision. He consulted Mike Larson, a veteran MLB scout. “With a kid like that,” Larson said, “baseball is not as big of a deal, it comes naturally. But if he wants to be a professional in football, he will have to sacrifice the next step and focus completely on football. He’s going to need to be entirely invested.”
“Once we told him that,” Hawkins recalled. “He was entirely invested in football.”
The Tigers drafted Mahomes in the 37th round of the 2014 draft. Their scouting director called with a message: “We know you’re probably not coming. We just figured we’d give it a shot.”
Mahomes said thank you, and that the assumption was correct: He was dead set on moving to Lubbock, where he would play quarterback for Texas Tech.

* * *
Mahomes’ collegiate statistics were gaudy. Last year, as a junior, he threw for 5,052 yards, completing 65.7 percent of his passes, with 41 touchdowns and 10 interceptions over 12 games. He averaged 49 pass attempts per game. That includes the backyard football bonanza against Oklahoma in October, when Mahomes set a single-game FBS record with 819 yards of offense, accumulated over 100 plays (88 passes, 12 runs), along with seven touchdowns (five passing, two running). Oklahoma won, 66-59. Even Mahomes didn’t realize the absurdity until midway through the fourth quarter when his freshman-year roommate, wideout Hunter Rittimann, accurately reported: “Dude, you have like 700 passing yards.” Mahomes claims his arm wasn’t sore the next day—“I think pitching conditioned my arm”—though he threw for a season-low 206 yards the following week, in a double-overtime win at TCU.
Here’s the first thing that gives evaluators pause. The Red Raiders run a variation of the Air Raid offense, popularized by former coach Mike Leach (Kliff Kingsbury, Tech’s current coach, played quarterback under Leach). It’s a quarterback-friendly system, pass-happy and full of quick-strike plays, leading to huge (and what many would call inflated) statistical outputs. According to most NFL evaluators, the system doesn’t translate to the pros because it’s so heavy on predetermined reads.

Indeed, NFL evaluators concede that the volume of passes isn’t the problem, but rather other stylistic differences that don’t translate to the NFL, specifically commanding a huddle and taking snaps from under center. And while Mahomes will need to learn to work the huddle—he previously used signals to relay plays—he is quick to make this point: “Kingsbury made us take snaps under center every single day at practice, just so we were comfortable there. We didn’t want to have any miscues anytime we did it. We ran some NFL stuff. I didn’t do any three- or five- or seven-step drops from under center, but we did some play-actions, we did some handoffs, some bootlegs.”
An NFL scout who studied Mahomes’ tape said that while he was under center some, it was sparingly and usually in short-yardage situations. Mike Sheppard, the longtime NFL assistant who is tutoring Mahomes, is working on his five- and seven-step drops and rhythm throws, separating the drop from the throw. Mahomes says he had a little bit of an extra step in his left foot because of being used to the shotgun, a habit he fixed in about two weeks.
Another thing Mahomes will stress in Indianapolis: He had more responsibilities in Lubbock than you think. Kingsbury allowed Mahomes to begin checking plays at line of scrimmage during the quarterback’s sophomore year, and by last year Mahomes could check any play he wanted. In fact, Kingsbury’s sideline signals were an exception—he used them only when he wanted Mahomes to keep his play no matter what. A scout said that is unusual for a college spread quarterback. It was a virtue of Mahomes starting 28 games.

* * *
Because Mahomes played three sports in high school, he rarely attended specialized football camps. One of his first camp experiences was last summer as a counselor at the Manning Passing Academy. Mahomes took note of a conversation with Peyton. “He watches himself over and over again,” Mahomes says. “Peyton watched the TV version of himself. He watched as much film on himself as he does on others.” And so Mahomes went home and entered a YouTube wormhole searching “Pat Mahomes clips.”
Mahomes says his new habit helped him cut interceptions down from 15 in 2015 to 10 last season (despite a slight uptick in pass attempts). Perhaps next year he’ll even begin TiVo-ing his games, he says. NFL teams hope Mahomes continues on that curve.
There are two common refrains from NFL evaluators: (1) Mahomes could have the strongest arm in the NFL draft, and (2) He needs to clean up footwork and improve his decision-making.
“He’s athletic, and has plenty of velocity. It’s special when you come across someone with an arm like that,” Sheppard says. “But he has the arm strength where it doesn’t always have to be perfect in terms of fundamentals. He can still get the ball out there.”
Watching Mahomes invokes memories of Kingsbury’s most famous pupil: Johnny Manziel, who played under Kingsbury when the coach was offensive coordinator at Texas A&M. Mahomes is a bigger, sturdier, harder-to-tackle version of Manziel, and his arm is far stronger. And in nearly every game, Mahomes is improvising and resetting on the move, juking defenders and hurling the ball deep.
In a conversation with The MMQB’s Peter King, Mike Mayock said of Mahomes: “He’s looking for a home run on every throw. Gunslingers cut both ways. He throws off a back foot with a funky platform, and hits a wide receiver 40 yards downfield in a tiny window. Next series, he throws into traffic with a seven-point lead late in the game when all you need is a field goal. Can you legislate out some of the bad stuff? Footwork is all over the place. Awareness of situational football simply must improve. He has to learn when it’s okay to take a shot. My first thought is back to Jay Cutler. Cutler had to make all kinds of crazy throws to keep a bad team, Vandy, competitive in a tough league. But there was no denying his talent. Same with Mahomes.”
When Mahomes weighed his decision to declare, he again consulted his godfather. Hawkins, who spent two decades in major league clubhouses, devised a litmus test. He used Alshon Jeffrey as an example (for no other reason than Jeffrey was on his fantasy team).
Hawkins set the scene. “You’re in the huddle, and you’re surrounded by grown men with families. Alshon Jeffrey is screaming at you: ‘I need the freaking ball!’ Are you able to look him in the eyes, assure him you’ll do what’s in the best interest of the offense, but also—get the man the ball? Are you ready to lead grown men?”
Mahomes didn’t hesitate; he said he’s been waiting for that moment his whole life. And for an NFL team, that moment could be coming sooner than anyone thought.





“I remember thinking to myself, ‘Oh, O.K.,’” Bowen says, “‘So that’s where Tom ended up.’”

He is back in the Chicago suburbs, at a coffee shop a few miles from his home. While Brady’s ascension is that of a legend, Bowen’s seven-year, four-stop, three-cut grind is a more typical snapshot of an NFL player’s career arc, and a true success story relative to most sixth-round picks. Bowen and Brady intersected several times, and though Bowen zigged while Brady zagged, it wasn’t until this year that the paths again aligned—metaphorically—as both men achieved validation.

“But for the rest of my life, I’ll always be known as the guy taken right before Tom Brady,” Bowen says, smirking. “It’s been attached to me. It’s something you talk about at parties. It’s kind of become a thing.”

* * *
Bowen arrived at Iowa as a quarterback. Before his sophomore year, he met with Hawkeyes legend Chuck Long, then the team’s defensive backs coach. “Do you want to play on Sundays?” Long asked. “Then come play for me.” And so Bowen flipped sides and thrived—for the most part. In 1998, the Hawkeyes hosted No. 25 Michigan on a drizzly Saturday at Kinnick Stadium. Brady was under center for the Wolverines, and threw the only touchdown in a 12-9 UM victory. “I’m still pissed about this play,” Bowen says. “I remember everything. He beat me on an inside slant route to Tai Streets. If I would’ve kept my shoulders square, instead of guessing, it would have been fine. But Tom smoked me.”
A journalism major, Bowen spent free time working for The Daily Iowan, writing a weekly column during football season and covering the track beat in the spring. The NCAA, of course, prevented him from making any significant salary from his work—only $10 per article. But, to be fair, “that’s a lot of beer money in Iowa City,” he says.
His rookie year, Bowen started two games at safety for St. Louis, but his value was on special teams. “That’s how I made the league, that’s how I stayed in the league,” he says. But his second season-opener sent the Rams to visit the Eagles on the unforgiving turf of old Veterans Stadium. He stepped on one of the seams where they lay turf down over the base paths, breaking his foot. In Week 6, the Rams asked if Bowen could run. “I was 23, I didn’t know any better,” he says. “I wasn’t 100 percent, but I ran because they asked me to. And so right after I run, they say I’m healthy, and then they cut me.”
So began a workout tour: Fly to Green Bay, home for a day, fly to Phoenix then San Francisco then Seattle, and from there a red-eye to Boston. Bowen, by this point well out of clean clothes, was picked up at Logan Airport and driven to Foxborough by a quality control assistant. He worked out immediately upon arriving. “My foot is not healed,” Bowen remembers. “But to stay in the league, you have to take risks. So there I was, in front of Bill Belichick and Scott Pioli, trying my best.” Bowen’s college coach, Kirk Ferentz, has a relationship with Belichick from their days with the Browns, and Bowen felt it was his best of the five tryouts. Bowen’s agent reported back that the Patriots were very interested. Pioli called after reviewing scans from Massachusetts General Hospital: “Sorry, you’re not healthy, we can’t sign you.”
A few months later Brady led the Patriots past the Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI, the franchise’s first championship.

* * *
Bowen did latch on with a team later in 2001, signing with Green Bay. It was a spot he liked. His longtime girlfriend, Shawn, was now his wife, and she was only a short drive away in Illinois. He practiced with Brett Favre every day. After joining the Packers midseason in 2001, he signed a restricted free-agent deal to stay in 2002, which led to his most memorable professional highlight.
“I had four interceptions in my career, and the other ones… look, you’re probably not going to talk about Quincy Carter, Doug Johnson, Jake Delhomme,” Bowen says. “But when you intercept the greatest quarterback of all time…”
Visiting Foxborough in Week 6, the Packers were protecting a 14-3 lead late in the first half. Brady was looking to put up points before halftime. Coming out of the two-minute warning, a false start penalty had turned a third-and-3 into a third-and-8 from New England’s 43.
“We were playing Cover 2—called it Double Zone,” Bowen says. “Deion Branch on the dig route. I’m taught to play top-down, meaning, I play over the top of everything and drive down on intermediate routes. Brady locks in on Branch. I got a great jump on the ball and we both get our hands on the throw at the catch point. The ball kind of pops up. So, I just stick my hand back to get a piece of it and pulled it in. Some real luck involved, but I'll take it. That’s my first career interception.”
The ball came home with Bowen—it rode in the empty seat next to him on the flight home. Now it’s on display in Bowen’s home office. He has four sons now, and whenever they bring a new friend over it’s the first thing they ask to look at. (Bowen’s sons, by the way, have become Patriots’ fans. “They like Gronk a lot, and so therefore they like Brady. They were definitely rooting for him in the Super Bowl.”)
After that 2002 season, Bowen signed a four-year deal with Washington, his most lucrative contract: four years for $6 million, with $1.6 million guaranteed. “And in typical fashion for deals like that, only played three,” he says, due to a knee injury. All the while, he focused on life after football. As he did in college, he took in-season writing gigs with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Washington Examiner and Niagara Gazette, heeding a journalism professor’s advice to get as many clips as possible.
While Brady sees almost no limits on the length of his football career, Bowen is already firmly situated in his second career, as a journalist. He earned a Master’s degree at DePaul and worked stints with the National Football Post, Chicago Tribune and Bleacher Report. Bowen now pens a popular column for ESPN, blending X’s and O’s analysis with experience as a player.
“I’m very proud of my career,” Bowen says. “When you’re talking about that point in the draft, it’s fight-to-survive mode.”
Spurgeon Wynn, for instance, the sixth quarterback taken in 2000 (Cleveland, 183rd overall), lasted two seasons in the NFL, making one start for the Browns in 2001 and two for the Vikings a year later. He spent some time in NFL Europe as well. He was also in Houston when Brady hoisted the Lombardi Trophy for the fifth time; Wynn works there as an energy broker. Sherrod Gideon, the man taken one spot after Brady, spent time on practice squads in St. Louis and Miami, but never played in a regular-season game.
“[As a sixth-rounder] you’re just trying to make a team, maybe survive a couple years,” Bowen says. “I lasted seven.”
A week after his final season in Buffalo, Bowen’s first son, Matthew Jr., was born. Bowen’s agent said two teams wanted to sign him. “But I was going to be 31, I had multiple injuries, and I knew what kind of deals these were, to cover kicks,” Bowen says. “What would an eighth year in the league prove? Would that change anything?”
Matthew Jr. has Down Syndrome, and Bowen decided he didn’t want to uproot his family—not to mention move away from trusted doctors and therapists—yet again, and retired. His writing career took off, and provides him enough flexibility to pick up his four sons from school everyday. But Bowen still felt an itch to get back in the game. Three years ago, he inquired at the local catholic high school about becoming a coach. “It’s been one of the best decisions I ever made,” Bowen says. “It got me to a point in life where I found balance, where I felt comfortable and satisfied.”
As an assistant at IC Catholic, Bowen uses his experiences. “I’m old now, none of these kids would know me as a player,” he says. “But they love saying, ‘My coach is the guy drafted before Tom Brady.’” When he tells his defensive backs not to guess, he cites that play at Iowa when Brady beat him on for a touchdown. When he preaches persistence, he often says, “it’s not where you start, it’s where you end up,” and uses Brady’s sixth-round status as an example.
Last year the team had only one Division I player (running back Jordan Rowell, heading off to Northern Illinois); the rest are “just really good high school football players,” Bowen says. “It’s the last line of competitive innocence.” IC Catholic went 14-0 and won the state title. As Bowen celebrated with parents and coaches after the state final, he couldn’t comprehend why it meant so much to him. He had never won a championship at any level. “I guess I underestimated my desire to get to this point in my life.”
A few nights after Brady won his fifth title, the guy taken right before him was at a ceremony in Elmhurst, Ill., where he was presented with his first ring.


IRVINE, Calif. — Over the past year, college football analysts and draft pundits have gushed that John Ross, the University of Washington receiver with blinding speed, could be the next DeSean Jackson. Few realized, however, that the nine-year NFL veteran had taken it upon himself to groom his potential successor.
The relationship began last summer at a barbershop in Long Beach, both players’ hometown. Ross’s father, John Ross Jr. (the younger Ross is John Ross III), a regular patron, bragged nearly every day that his son was the next big thing. Jackson’s brother, Khaled, another regular, relayed the conversation to DeSean. And so the Redskins receiver decided to see for himself. He obtained Ross’ cell phone number last July and cold-called him.
“What are you doing right now?” Jackson blurted when Ross picked up.
“Uhh…” Ross stumbled.
“You should be working out!” Jackson ordered.
“I’m sorry, who is this?” Ross asked.
“DeSean Jackson.”
“Seriously?”
“When are you going to come work out with me?”
“I’m in Seattle…” Ross said. (It was, after all, two weeks before Huskies’ training camp began.)
“So?” Jackson asked.
Two days later, Ross was on a flight back to Los Angeles. He reported to a dimly lit high school gym in Lynwood—“it felt really secluded,” Ross remembers—and sure enough, there was Jackson. In a two-hour session, Jackson had Ross mimic his footwork drills. The veteran explained what he looks for on routes. Most importantly, he imparted this advice: “You’re fast, but you don’t have to use all of your speed every single time. Use your speed as a weapon, slow down sometimes. Focus on technique and that’s how you’ll beat your guy.”
“It sounds so simple, but it’s not, and at first, I didn’t really understand,” Ross says. “But DeSean and I kept talking during the season, probably two times a week, and then it just clicked. By using his advice, that’s how I took my game to the next level.”
The combine could cement Ross’s status as the fastest player in the 2017 draft (he says he ran a laser-timed 4.30 last week). Ross led all Power-5 conference receivers with 17 touchdown catches last season, on 81 receptions for 1,150 yards—all despite missing all of 2015 with a torn ACL. Perhaps most impressive: Over three years at Washington, he had 24 touchdowns on only 134 touches on offense (not to mention an additional four TDs on kickoff returns). A decade ago, a player with Ross’s underwhelming size (5' 11", 190 pounds) might have been relegated to the slot. But as top NFL corners have become bigger and more reliant on length than pure movement skills, there are now opportunities for smaller, quicker receivers to become an offense’s top target, bouncing around in formations (see: 5' 11" Odell Beckham Jr., 5' 10" Antonio Brown, 5' 10" Doug Baldwin, 5' 10" Brandin Cooks, 5' 9" T.Y. Hilton, and of course, 5' 10" Jackson.)
“When you watch John Ross’s tape,” says one NFL evaluator, “you could argue he’s just an exceptional slot guy. But smart offenses will figure out ways to incorporate him everywhere.”

“Oh yeah,” Ross says when reminded of her compliment. “She’s pretty cool.” The only person to truly humble Ross? Washington women’s basketball sensation Kelsey Plum, who accepted his 1 on 1 challenge this fall, then won support from student onlookers in the bleachers when she hit her first 11 shots. “I was like, ‘Come on guys, where’s my love?!’” Ross says. “But of course everyone should root for Kelsey. She’s a good friend. She’s awesome.”
“It’s funny,” says his Washington position coach, Bush Hamdan, who last week was hired as the Atlanta Falcons’ new quarterbacks coach, “John Ross lives in this world with flashy guys and big names. But really, he’s just this sweet, gentle kid. I’m going to miss him like hell as a player. But I’ll miss him three times as much as a person.”

* * *
Ross began playing football when he was 7, and scored a lot of touchdowns—so many that he developed a reputation in Long Beach. The ultimate neighborhood status was playing in Snoop Dogg’s All-Star league. One weekend, Ross went to a game with his mom, and afterwards approached Snoop for an autograph. Amid the mob, the rapper looked right at him. “I know you,” Snoop said. “You’re little Ross!”
“And then John comes back to me,” recalls his mother, Dayna Mitchell, “and says Snoop wants to talk to me.” They exchanged numbers and soon, Ross was a Snoop Dogg All-Star. “People always ask me what it was like playing for Snoop,” Ross says. “I'm telling you, he actually coached. He was at every practice. He called the plays in the huddle.”
The Snoop coaching playbook, according to Ross: “Snoop loved to scrimmage. We’d get there, warm up, then he goes, ‘O.K., let’s scrimmage!’ In games, he always called an all-out blitz. Nobody calls an all-out blitz at that age. We were 9-years-old. Nobody throws the ball! But he called the 6-2 Dogg House, his favorite play. That means everybody goes. Everybody. Safeties can be 30 yards deep and they come too. What’s crazy is it actually worked.”
During his elementary school years, bright lights and big names became normalized for Ross. He played at Ford Field, home of the Detroit Lions, as an 11 year old; he shook Ben Roethlisberger’s hand before Super Bowl XL; he spent Saturday nights sleeping over at Snoop’s mansion (a driver escorted Ross and teammates back to Long Beach in the morning). According to Ross, Snoop separated rap and football. He never smoked or drank in front of the kids, and the recording studio was off limits. “Being with Snoop was just normal,” Ross says. “We still talk a lot. The other day when I went on Instagram live, he was the first one to comment, getting on me about my haircut. He’s always looking out for me.”
Ross received his first college offers at 14: UCLA and Washington. He bonded with then-Huskies coach Steve Sarkisian by playing a dominos iPhone game every night. Sarkisian won nearly every time, but the relationship was built.
Ross joined Washington in 2013 as a four-star athlete. He was the classic example of a player with such explosive potential, coaches didn’t know how to best utilize him. As a sophomore in 2014, he scored five touchdowns on offense and two on kickoff returns. But with a depleted defensive backfield—star corner Marcus Peters was dismissed in November—Ross started the last four games as a defensive back. In the spring, Ross began training full-time at receiver. Then he tore his ACL in a non-contact drill.
“It turns out,” Ross says. “That’s the best thing that ever happened to me.”
* * *

If teammates ever want to know where Ross is, best guess is the hot tub. During his year of rehab, he never missed a treatment. He set up solo cone drills on the field at dawn, and waved to assistant coaches up in the windows working wee hours. He spent every practice shadowing Hamdan, a sort of coach’s apprentice. Ross had always watched film, but he never knew how to study it. “Can you show me?” he asked grad assistant D’Andre Goodwin, once a receiver for the Denver Broncos. “And teach me about coverages.”
By junior year, Ross was a certified film junkie. He downloaded Huskies film from their server, and watched it twice over. First, he’d ask, What could I do better? Then he texted Washington’s No. 2 receiver, Dante Pettis. What were you thinking on this play? Then he’d look at the freshmen. “I’d be that guy, at home on my couch texting them clips while they’re in class,” Ross explains. “Move your feet a different way this time.” He then watched Washington opponents. After that, Ross’s favorite bit: He asked grad assistants to cut up every catch by Antonio Brown, Odell Beckham Jr., Brandin Cooks and Julio Jones. “If I had to run the same route, I’d try to emulate it,” he says.
Ross had a different quarterback each year at Washington, but found his match in Jake Browning. When Browning first arrived on campus, he sent the then-injured Ross a direct message: “I’m sorry that happened to you. Let’s throw.”
“When I came [in 2015] the word around John was that he wasn’t necessarily a complete wide receiver,” Hamdan says. “From a perception standpoint, he was electric and extremely fast, but a speed guy. He just needed to hone his skills.”
As Ross melded lessons from that off-year with advice from Jackson, he thrived. He got in and out of breaks more smoothly. His routes became crisper.
“We see so much press coverage these days,” Hamdan says. “We knew if we could just get him off the line of scrimmage, utilize his speed and create separation, he’d be unstoppable.”
Hamdan, like most who encounter Ross, fell in love with his positivity. “John is the kind of guy who can make anyone laugh,” says his current roommate and childhood friend, Boise State running back Jeremy McNichols.
“Some days he’d come in the meeting room, and if he wasn’t smiling I’d send him back out to come in again with a smile,” Hamdan says. “Because my day was affected if he wasn’t overly in a great mood. This is the greatest kid I will ever coach. His personality is contagious.”
Ross says he has never drank nor smoked. He rarely goes out. (It’s a big deal when he does, friends say, though Ross says there’s only so much fun he can have standing in a corner sipping a Dasani.) His one vice is Wingstop—he even went the day of the Huskies’ playoff game against Alabama. Each day, Ross texts his mom “Good Morning.” He bowls, though he says he’s not very good at it, and still plays dominos on his phone. (And says he’s much improved: “I bet I can take on anyone now.”)
Ross is also a competitor. Washington had two of the top corners in the country in Kevin King and Sidney Jones, and every day at practice they’d fight to face Ross. Now training in Irvine for the draft, Ross went nearly six weeks working with a live quarterback. Last week, UNC’s Mitch Trubisky came by for a session. “It was difficult catching from him because it was my first time catching since the [playoff] game,” Ross says. “He was putting it right where it needed to be. He was throwing it on the money.”
When Ross left the facility, he thought to himself, “That kid can really play.” And then another thought: “Tomorrow I’m going to be a lot better than today.”

* * *







* * *

* * *


Blocking is probably one of my best assets. Catching as well. I can also run through the tackles. I always break the first tackle and get to the second level.

Absolutely. I used to play receiver when I was in high school. So catching the ball and running routes for me is natural. Being able to have that arsenal as a running back makes me deadly and coveted of what NFL teams are looking for.

I grew up watching LaDainian Tomlinson. We’re about the same size, can catch a lot of balls in the backfield, he’s a guy that ran through tackles, and he could play special teams as well.

Explosiveness. I don’t think I was explosive enough when I got to the second level. I also am working on my sideline running, staying in bounds.

Oh yeah, that’s like my big bro. He treats me like his little brother. We only were teammates one year but it’s a relationship we’ve maintained. We talk probably more than two times a week ever since he went on to the NFL. When I first got to school, he took me under his wing. It was fun watching him break out this year, but it wasn’t crazy. I expected that. He was overlooked, he should’ve been one of the top two running backs when he came out, he shouldn’t have gone in the fifth round. I feel like that happens a lot coming out of a smaller school like Boise State.

A lot of off-the-field stuff. He always says you need to handle your business off the field, with school make sure you’re taking that seriously, being in the community and showing your face, just being a good person overall, he says you can’t overlook that stuff. And on the field, it’s just like being a dog. Just being that guy that nobody can touch, nobody can tackle, every time he gets the ball he has the mindset that he can score and be special.

It is deep, but also I feel like next year is going to be deep. I felt like I had accomplished everything that I had wanted to accomplish in college—I won a big bowl game, won a conference championship, got to play behind Jay for a year then took over for him. The decision came down to this: Running backs don’t really last that long in the league and just in football in general. So after the year I had, I knew that that my game would translate to the NFL. So coming out early was the best option for me.
* * *
Regular readers of this column might notice I have a not-so-slight fascination with LSU coach Ed Orgeron. His deep-rooted ties to the Bayou are to be admired, evidenced by consuming 19 servings of gumbo in a one-week span while on the recruiting trail. But this… this is something else.



Alton Voss was a quarterback at the University of South Florida, a three-star recruit from nearby Gulf High. Redshirting as a freshman, he didn’t like the separation of scout team and starters. He attended lifts and study halls but never really felt present. “It was my first obstacle as an adult, and I didn’t know how to handle it, so I went through the motions,” Voss says. “I was 19. I had tunnel vision.” That was 2007.
Voss drank, then drank heavily. Weekend partying began on Thursdays, then moved up to Wednesdays. By spring ball he had incorporated Oxycodone into his repertoire. That summer he moved home to New Port Richey, Fla., commuting 45 minutes for practices, driving home each night to get high. And then he woke up one morning and decided he wanted to be a regular college student. He asked his coach for a meeting. “In 20 minutes,” he says, “I gave up a full ride.”
Voss then plunged into a harrowing spiral. A decade later he has resurfaced, miraculously, as an NFL prospect.
In The College Column, we have mostly covered top prospects from powerhouse programs. But each year leading up to the draft there are dozens of men that share the same dreams, with less linear paths. Few paths veer as dramatically as Alton Voss’s.
After leaving USF, Voss concocted a fake back injury. It was good enough for a pain management clinic, from which he received prescriptions for Oxycontin and Roxicodone. He tried returning to football twice. He enrolled at College of the Sequoias in California (that lasted a week) then Fort Scott Community College in Kansas (that lasted three weeks). At Fort Scott, Voss brought methadone—just enough so that he wouldn’t get dope sick. Suffering from withdrawal, physically, he could not rebound. He overslept and missed meetings. The coach finally said, “I like you, but I need to let you go.”
“I was probably slipping into a depression,” Voss says. “Some days I just wanted to get high and escape my reality. Other times I wanted to get back on track. I just couldn’t.”
Once, Voss wrapped string around his arm and shot crack in a Walmart parking lot. In 2011 he almost overdosed. He quit pills, quit crack and decided he would only smoke marijuana. He enrolled at a community college in Florida. A few months later he had a manic episode. In the middle of class Voss had a premonition he was going to win the lottery. He went to a gas station and bought six scratch-off tickets—and won each time. Reasonably hyped, he called a friend in Michigan to gush about his fortune.
The friend hung up, then called right back: “It doesn’t sound like you’re doing so great. Maybe you should come up here to get away for a few days.” And so Voss, who had $1,800 from selling his pills, bought a one-way ticket to Michigan. He still wasn’t well. Upon arriving in Holland, Mich., he went for a jog. Here’s how he described what happened:
“I know it sounds crazy. I had this current that guided me. There was a man who got out of the car, and the current told me to go in that car.”
So Voss stole a car. He drove it to a cemetery. Police lights flashed. Voss, who had gotten out of the car, broke down. He was arrested and briefly admitted to the mental health ward at Hackley Hospital in Muskegon, Mich. When he returned to jail, he was assigned a public defender, Jane Patterson. She worked a deal to reduce the charges from felony to a misdemeanor. But among the judge’s orders: Voss needed to be on the first flight back home to Florida.
Voss reached out to Patterson to stay in touch. They exchanged emails, then texts, then long phone calls. “I know this place,” she said one day in June 2011, “where I think you can get better.” That’s how Voss ended up in Argentina. He spent two years at a rehabilitation facility, CMI Abasto in Buenos Aires: one year in-patient, the other out-patient. He became clean, then healthy.
“When I first was down in Argentina, football was the last thing I was thinking about,” he says. “But as I started to think about my goals, football became important to me again. I wanted to finish my journey.” There were people at the rehab facility in Argentina from western Michigan, including a family member of a Grand Valley State booster.
“That’s how I found myself at a Panera with Jane Patterson and a booster detailing me about Alton’s case,” says Matt Mitchell, GVSU’s head coach. “Obviously I had some hesitations. We were taking him right from rehab back into the fire. This is a campus of more than 25,000 students.”
Mitchell gave Voss a shot. They gathered his transcripts from across the country, and in 2013 Voss walked on as a 23-year-old freshman. He began as a tight end. “I wasn’t great at pass-blocking or run-blocking,” Voss admits. But he got after it on special teams. Impressed by his effort, coaches switched him to defensive end (where he was older than his position coach). Coaches monitored Voss closely; they saw nothing but a leader. He was good with teammates, and he passed every NCAA-issued drug test. Over the past two seasons he accumulated 7.5 sacks, 20.5 tackles for loss and forced five fumbles. His 6'3", 240-pound frame and non-stop motor caught the eyes of scouts. Many NFL teams noticed Voss on film while scouting GVSU teammate Matt Judon, a 2016 fifth-round pick of the Ravens.
“Some teams have told me, ‘I’m sorry, I can’t bring a 28-year-old former drug addict to my player personnel guys in good conscience,’” Mitchell says. “Other teams are intrigued.”
Mitchell’s pitch to NFL evaluators: Voss may be 28, but there’s not a lot of wear on his tires. He wasn’t playing football for five years, and he stayed injury-free over four years at GVSU. And the coach can’t say enough about his influence on teammates.
Four years clean, Voss has entered the public speaking circuit. He talks with the same confidence and cogency he evinced on the phone last week as he recounted his story. At best, Voss will be a priority free agent who needs to earn a roster spot at training camp, likely on special teams. “Even if that doesn’t happen,” Mitchell says. “He should take tremendous pride in the fact he even got to this point.”

Alton Voss was a quarterback at the University of South Florida, a three-star recruit from nearby Gulf High. Redshirting as a freshman, he didn’t like the separation of scout team and starters. He attended lifts and study halls but never really felt present. “It was my first obstacle as an adult, and I didn’t know how to handle it, so I went through the motions,” Voss says. “I was 19. I had tunnel vision.” That was 2007.
Voss drank, then drank heavily. Weekend partying began on Thursdays, then moved up to Wednesdays. By spring ball he had incorporated Oxycodone into his repertoire. That summer he moved home to New Port Richey, Fla., commuting 45 minutes for practices, driving home each night to get high. And then he woke up one morning and decided he wanted to be a regular college student. He asked his coach for a meeting. “In 20 minutes,” he says, “I gave up a full ride.”
Voss then plunged into a harrowing spiral. A decade later he has resurfaced, miraculously, as an NFL prospect.
In The College Column, we have mostly covered top prospects from powerhouse programs. But each year leading up to the draft there are dozens of men that share the same dreams, with less linear paths. Few paths veer as dramatically as Alton Voss’s.
After leaving USF, Voss concocted a fake back injury. It was good enough for a pain management clinic, from which he received prescriptions for Oxycontin and Roxicodone. He tried returning to football twice. He enrolled at College of the Sequoias in California (that lasted a week) then Fort Scott Community College in Kansas (that lasted three weeks). At Fort Scott, Voss brought methadone—just enough so that he wouldn’t get dope sick. Suffering from withdrawal, physically, he could not rebound. He overslept and missed meetings. The coach finally said, “I like you, but I need to let you go.”
“I was probably slipping into a depression,” Voss says. “Some days I just wanted to get high and escape my reality. Other times I wanted to get back on track. I just couldn’t.”
Once, Voss wrapped string around his arm and shot crack in a Walmart parking lot. In 2011 he almost overdosed. He quit pills, quit crack and decided he would only smoke marijuana. He enrolled at a community college in Florida. A few months later he had a manic episode. In the middle of class Voss had a premonition he was going to win the lottery. He went to a gas station and bought six scratch-off tickets—and won each time. Reasonably hyped, he called a friend in Michigan to gush about his fortune.
The friend hung up, then called right back: “It doesn’t sound like you’re doing so great. Maybe you should come up here to get away for a few days.” And so Voss, who had $1,800 from selling his pills, bought a one-way ticket to Michigan. He still wasn’t well. Upon arriving in Holland, Mich., he went for a jog. Here’s how he described what happened:
“I know it sounds crazy. I had this current that guided me. There was a man who got out of the car, and the current told me to go in that car.”
So Voss stole a car. He drove it to a cemetery. Police lights flashed. Voss, who had gotten out of the car, broke down. He was arrested and briefly admitted to the mental health ward at Hackley Hospital in Muskegon, Mich. When he returned to jail, he was assigned a public defender, Jane Patterson. She worked a deal to reduce the charges from felony to a misdemeanor. But among the judge’s orders: Voss needed to be on the first flight back home to Florida.
Voss reached out to Patterson to stay in touch. They exchanged emails, then texts, then long phone calls. “I know this place,” she said one day in June 2011, “where I think you can get better.” That’s how Voss ended up in Argentina. He spent two years at a rehabilitation facility, CMI Abasto in Buenos Aires: one year in-patient, the other out-patient. He became clean, then healthy.
“When I first was down in Argentina, football was the last thing I was thinking about,” he says. “But as I started to think about my goals, football became important to me again. I wanted to finish my journey.” There were people at the rehab facility in Argentina from western Michigan, including a family member of a Grand Valley State booster.
“That’s how I found myself at a Panera with Jane Patterson and a booster detailing me about Alton’s case,” says Matt Mitchell, GVSU’s head coach. “Obviously I had some hesitations. We were taking him right from rehab back into the fire. This is a campus of more than 25,000 students.”
Mitchell gave Voss a shot. They gathered his transcripts from across the country, and in 2013 Voss walked on as a 23-year-old freshman. He began as a tight end. “I wasn’t great at pass-blocking or run-blocking,” Voss admits. But he got after it on special teams. Impressed by his effort, coaches switched him to defensive end (where he was older than his position coach). Coaches monitored Voss closely; they saw nothing but a leader. He was good with teammates, and he passed every NCAA-issued drug test. Over the past two seasons he accumulated 7.5 sacks, 20.5 tackles for loss and forced five fumbles. His 6'3", 240-pound frame and non-stop motor caught the eyes of scouts. Many NFL teams noticed Voss on film while scouting GVSU teammate Matt Judon, a 2016 fifth-round pick of the Ravens.
“Some teams have told me, ‘I’m sorry, I can’t bring a 28-year-old former drug addict to my player personnel guys in good conscience,’” Mitchell says. “Other teams are intrigued.”
Mitchell’s pitch to NFL evaluators: Voss may be 28, but there’s not a lot of wear on his tires. He wasn’t playing football for five years, and he stayed injury-free over four years at GVSU. And the coach can’t say enough about his influence on teammates.
Four years clean, Voss has entered the public speaking circuit. He talks with the same confidence and cogency he evinced on the phone last week as he recounted his story. At best, Voss will be a priority free agent who needs to earn a roster spot at training camp, likely on special teams. “Even if that doesn’t happen,” Mitchell says. “He should take tremendous pride in the fact he even got to this point.”
* * *

* * *
On the night of the college football national championship game, Germone Hopper slunk into the couch cushion at his friend’s apartment in downtown Charlotte. Hopper, a former Clemson wide receiver, didn’t watch all of the Tigers’ games this season. Sometimes he avoided being in the same room as a TV altogether. “Depending on my mood on a given day, I knew if I watched, it might make me bitter,” Hopper says. “I didn’t want to feel a certain way.”
But as the Tigers faced Alabama—a rematch of a national title game Hopper participated in a year earlier—he decided to cheer on Dabo Swinney, the coach who recruited him, and Deshaun Watson, the quarterback who delivered the bulk of his 71 career receptions, 797 yards and six touchdowns. “Coach [Swinney] always told me his plan for the football team was to win a championship by the time I was set to graduate,” Hopper says. “And he did.”
Hopper sat through the entire four-hour, eight-minute broadcast. Watson dazzled in a 35-31 win. Confetti littered Raymond James Stadium. After midnight, the 23-year-old Hopper sent his old coach a congratulatory text. According to Hopper, Swinney responded right away.
Hopper never became what he was capable of becoming at Clemson. A four-star recruit from Phillip O. Berry Academy in Charlotte, Hopper attracted a who’s who of ACC and SEC recruiters. He was a 6-foot receiver with seductive speed; at the 2011 North Carolina track high school finals, Hopper’s 10.73 in the 100 meters placed him just .03 seconds behind Todd Gurley. Hopper chose Clemson so as to be part of the nation’s greatest wide receiver factory, but also because it was a straight, 100-mile shot down I-85. He joined the program but spent nearly every off day commuting home.
Coaches asked Hopper if he wanted to redshirt in 2012, and he didn’t hesitate to agree. After all, a depth chart featuring Sammy Watkins, DeAndre Hopkins and Martavis Bryant is not easy to crack. In 2013 Hopper returned kickoffs and filled in at receiver when Watkins needed a breather.
Hopper served two brief suspensions, for an undisclosed violation of team rules and for what he describes as not consistently fulfilling study hall hours. “I’ve learned from those experiences,” Hopper says. “You need to buy into the commitment that the coaches want you to buy into.” As he toggled up and down the depth chart for three years, Hopper was known for a couple of spectacular games, a few frustrating drops and briefly as a social media star around the 2015 Orange Bowl, when his locker-room-galvanizing dance moves went viral. (Hopper is said to have taught Swinney how to dab).
In the 2015 national title game, Hopper played sparingly: 15 snaps, targeted by Watson just once (an incompletion). All the while, he had been dealing with pressures at home. His girlfriend gave birth to their daughter in May, and he felt the guilt that comes with the distance between a parent and child. Hopper never knew his father; he has been in prison Hopper’s whole life. “I didn’t want that for my child,” Hopper says. “I felt I needed to be there.” And so about two weeks after the title game, Hopper called his position coach: “I think it would be best for me to finish out school here and transfer somewhere closer to home.”
And just like that, Hopper’s name was removed from Clemson’s roster. The plan was to be a grad transfer, perhaps slide down to the FCS or Division II level, play the 2016 season and enter the NFL draft. “But life steered me in a different direction,” he says. Instead Hopper took a part-time job at his godfather’s barbershop as a receptionist, earning $10 an hour, 20 hours a week. He moved in with his mom. He worked with a local trainer before and after shifts to stay in football shape, and needed to provide food not only for himself but for his child every day. It was the first fall since he was 6 years old that he was not a part of a team. “It was the first time in my life I felt like I needed to make decisions for myself,” he says.
Asked about regrets, Hopper is candid: “I learned not to make decisions based off emotion. I learned not to run away from my problems but to face them. I also learned that being away from football, I can’t take it for granted any more, like it was given to me.”
Hopper is generating some interest from NFL teams. He has maintained good relationships with the Clemson program; he visited with coaches last weekend and worked out at the facility. He will participate in Clemson’s pro day on March 21. An NFL scout familiar with Hopper called him an “intriguing talent” with value on special teams. But with inconsistency issues and having been away from the game for a year, Hopper has only an outside chance of being drafted. He should, however, get picked up by a team. All he wants is to get back in.

* * *
In the Northeast pocket of Kansas, in the stretches of prairies between Kansas City and Omaha, is a town called Baileyville. “You can find it on a map,” says Cody Heiman, currently Baileyville’s most famous resident. “If you know where to look.” The 2010 census says Baileyville has 181 residents, and Heiman’s graduating class at Baileyville B&B High School had 16 students. Needless to say they couldn’t field a full football team; but they dominated the state in eight-man football. “You know those TV shows where the whole town shuts down when there’s a football game on?” Heiman says. “That was us.” (Since Heiman graduated, B&B merged with a neighboring school.)
Heiman has never lived outside of Kansas. His mom sells crop insurance, his dad sells auto and livestock insurance, his three older siblings have settled across the state. A month ago Heiman packed one suitcase into his GMC truck and drove eight and a half hours to Chicago. “I figured I should probably leave my hunting gear at home,” he says. Heiman moved into the guest bedroom of an NFL agent’s home, and trains five days a week at Northwestern with four former Wildcats, including linebacker Anthony Walker and slot receiver Austin Carr. When he’s not stuck in traffic on the drive home, Heiman spends free time walking the city streets, meandering into the Lincoln Park Zoo (admission is free) or binge-watching “Homeland” at his temporary digs. “It’s all pretty crazy to take in,” he says. “It’s not every day a small-town kid like me gets to do something like this.”
NFL scouts have buzzed about Heiman’s college tape; he played at Division II Washburn in Topeka. He’s a 6'1", 235-pound linebacker with twitchy athleticism, though some teams have inquired if he’ll switch to fullback. Either way, the NFL is within reach for Heiman, which likely leads to this question: How does a player like Cody Heiman get discovered?
Eight-man football can look like a different sport. The field is shorter, 40-by-80 yards, and a game is eight-minute quarters. It’s faster than traditional football—one juke and you’re off—with much more space. “It’s hard for people to judge the film, I think, if they don’t know what to look for,” Heiman says. “The concepts are a little different. But at the end of the day, football is football. You can either play or you can’t.”
Heiman uploaded his highlights to Hudl, like most modern recruits, and received interest from Washburn. The school had just installed a new weight room, it was 83 miles away from Baileyville, and it was the type of program where the coach invites his players over for dinner a couple times a year. Heiman was sold. His parents could come to every game.
NFL scouts typically come through some Division II programs—and Washburn is within an hour of Kansas State and Kansas—but here is where Heiman received a boost: One of his teammates at Washburn is Jake Riederer, whose father, Russ, spent 13 years as the strength coach of the Chicago Bears. Russ Riederer retired 2005 to raise his family in a quieter life. He moved home to Kansas but stayed involved in football, Kansas all-star games and local high school combines.
“I heard about Cody Heiman well before he made it to Washburn,” Riederer says. The first thing that caught Riederer’s attention: In high school, the 215-pound Heiman won the state high jump by clearing 6' 8". “I mean, that should alert any NFL team of what kind of athlete he is,” Riederer says. Heiman grew up about 10 miles from John Riggins’ hometown. What’s interesting, Rieder says, “is if John Riggins was coming out of high school today I’m not so sure any Division I schools would have recruited him. Because recruiting now, especially in the Midwest, is more national. Back then you had to comb the state as hard as you could. They were taking more local kids, and they had more scholarships. So a Cody Heiman, at that point, would have gotten one.”
Heiman came to Washburn as a linebacker—playing 11-on-11 football for the first time in his life—but took a medical redshirt his freshman year. When he returned as a sophomore, the team lost so many running backs to injury that Heiman got a look in the backfield. After just three practices he made his running back debut: 132 yards on 26 carries. “The year of playing running back helped me learn a lot,” Heiman says. “When I switched back to linebacker the next year, I had a better grasp of what the offense was doing. I could react better. It sped the game up.”
In his senior season Heiman amassed 101 tackles, seven for loss, and 3.5 sacks, plus two interceptions and a 60-yard fumble recovery.
“I had Brian Urlacher at the Bears,” Riederer says. “I’m not saying Cody is Brian Urlacher, because he’s one of the special lifetime players you get to coach, but he’s not that far off.”
And so Riederer alerted a few friends in Chicago about Heiman, including his now-agent, Bynum Jaeger. Heiman will participate in Kansas’s pro day in March. According to an evaluator who has studied him, he has no real red flags. A finance and management major, he spent last summer working as a bank teller, and got a few shifts in right before Christmas break this year. He’s willing to switch to fullback, “if that gets me on the field faster,” and knows he’d likely earn his keep on special teams “because I love to tackle and get after it.”
“When NFL teams look at me, I’ve only played linebacker for three years,” he says. “I feel like I don't have anywhere to go but up.”

* * *


I played soccer for seven or eight years. When I was 12 or 13 I realized I wasn’t going to go anywhere with that, so I played rugby for a year. I played football, but I was too young to hit, so I didn’t like that and went back to rugby.

It’s funny, the way I got into it was this: I went home one night, I flipped on TV and I saw the Miami Dolphins and New York Giants playing. Eli Manning—he must have been so young. That game was at Wembley. I loved the way they were hitting each other, the intensity. So I began googling American football and got more into it. I first wanted to be a quarterback because I learned about Sam Bradford on the internet and I liked him when he was at Oklahoma. But I was a 5'11", 300-pound kid so....

I was 14. There were more opportunities for me here than in London. I moved to New Jersey because we had family there. Freshman year was great, then sophomore year was tricky because we moved back to England, me and my dad. I begged my dad to go back to the States, and he gave me one opportunity under the condition that I graduate from university and go as far as I could in football. So we came back, and I played sophomore and junior year.

I wanted to play in college, and my coach showed me a lot of prep schools around the East Coast and said if I played there a year, I could probably get a scholarship to play football. I didn’t have money to go to prep school so I went the juco route. I applied to a few places close by and ended up at Lackawanna College in Scranton, Pennsylvania.

I sent a ton of emails out every day, like I did in high school. One of the linemen that had just left Lackawanna [Mark Glowinski] plays for the Seahawks now, so I wrote, “If you let me come, I’ll play my butt off there and prove what I can do.” I probably sent emails to every Division I coach in the country. I’m not lying, probably 500-600 emails, to every coach a couple times each.

The first email I sent from juco was to Florida State. I sent the email around 1 p.m. At 3 p.m. I got an email from the offensive coordinator saying they loved my film and wanted to talk to me. I spoke to the offensive coordinator, the offensive line coach, [Rick] Trickett, then to coach [Jimbo] Fisher. They offered me right there on the spot. And from there, it just took off. I ended up with about 35 offers from top teams in the country.

I wasn’t experienced, but I think they saw my potential.

The family atmosphere and tradition. I had moved all over my entire life. When I got to Texas, it just felt like home.

Being invited was such a highlight. I was checking my email 24/7. They told me they’d reach out by Jan 31st. I checked my email every single day before then, and on Jan. 30 I was driving, and there it was: my combine invite. I pulled over and just needed a moment. It meant so much to me. I want to go there and show how powerful I am.



The consensus among NFL teams, 11 weeks before the draft, is this: All of the draft-eligible quarterbacks have zits. None of the top-tier selections (Notre Dame’s DeShone Kizer, UNC’s Mitch Trubisky, Clemson’s Deshaun Watson) is ready to command a team right away. It might be a reach to take any of the second-level prospects(Miami’s Brad Kaaya, Texas Tech’s Pat Mahomes, Pitt’s Nate Peterman, Cal’s Davis Webb) higher than late second round. Any of those prospects could be a fourth-round gem like the Cowboys found with Dak Prescott last season. Yet it feels like some team is going to reach much earlier.
The College Column has previously delved into the merits of the 2017 draft crop:







Robert Griffin III and Cody Kessler probably aren’t the long-term answer in Cleveland, but their presence will keep the Browns from using the top pick on a signal-caller. The 49ers should be the first team to grab a quarterback off the board (I consider Trubisky the favorite) to grow with new coach Kyle Shanahan, though they’ll need veteran help. In my opinion the Bears at No. 3 would be best off with this approach, assuming they cut ties with Jay Cutler: Keep Brian Hoyer as a stopgap and wait until the second, third or (hopefully) later round to get a Kaaya, Mahomes, Peterman or Webb. As for the Bills? In my first mock draft I had them taking Watson in the first round. I have no idea where they’re going with the position, but if they deem Tyrod Taylor too pricey, they’ll need a new QB ASAP.

The Cardinals and Chargers find themselves in nearly identical situations: As Carson Palmer and Philip Rivers’ careers wane, it’s time to find their heir apparents. I’ll slide the Saints in here too, with an aging Drew Brees, though their situation is not as dire. I mentioned the Chiefs as a wild card earlier considering that Smith’s contract is essentially a year-to-year deal. While Kansas City could be in play for Tony Romo, remember that general manager John Dorsey was schooled by Ron Wolf, who drafted quarterbacks as often as possible. I love the idea of the Chiefs picking up Watson, grooming him for a year, then perhaps cutting Smith in 2018 to save $17 million in cap space. The Jaguars appear committed to Blake Bortles—for now—but they would benefit from bringing in some competition. The Jets are a mess and appear to have drafter’s remorse with last year’s second-rounder, Christian Hackenberg. The only thing preventing me from elevating New York to the first group is its plethora of options (Bryce Petty, still there!), and I don’t think they should overdraft for a second year in a row. As for the Texans? Their buyer’s remorse on Brock Osweiler is no secret; the front office appears poised to give Tom Savage a fair chance, though they’d benefit from restocking with the draft for future (cheap, home-grown) talent in the event Savage does not develop and Osweiler cannot kick his funk.

The Bengals are likely set with the tandem of Andy Dalton and AJ McCarron, though I’d like to see them pick a prospect late—no earlier than the fourth round. Ditto: Dolphins with Ryan Tannehill and Matt Moore, and Panthers with Cam Newton and Derek Anderson. The Lions are secure with Matthew Stafford but need a backup, and it wouldn’t hurt to draft an option. Same goes for the Ravens and Steelers, as the AFC North rivals might begin planting the seeds for life post-Flacco and post-Roethlisberger. Monitor Kirk Cousins in Washington, though I’m inclined to believe he’ll stay. As for the Vikings? With reports that Teddy Bridgewater’s recovery process may extend well into 2017, the front office could begin thinking about a contingency plan for after Sam Bradford. The Giants may be in the market for a new Eli Manning backup. The Patriots are not going to pick a quarterback if they keep Jimmy Garoppolo. But if he gets traded…

The Packers still adhere to Ron Wolf principles, and though Brett Hundley appears to be a serviceable understudy, don’t be shocked if Green Bay takes a QB late. The Seahawks have backup Trevone Boykin under contract through 2018, but after a season in which Russell Wilson got hurt, I expect them to bring in a third quarterback to compete with Boykin, and perhaps to stick around.



* * *







* * *








* * *
Duke began its spring football practices on Feb. 3, officially kicking off the 2017 college football season—two days before Super Bowl 51 officially concluded the 2016 NFL season.
* * *
I often wonder if the most taxing aspect of recruiting is the monotony. In a radio interview last week with Bart Simmons, LSU coach Ed Orgeron was asked about in-home recruiting visits. That’s when Orgeron revealed this detail: In a one-week span, he ate 19 gumbos served at potential recruits’ homes. Think about that: 19 servings of gumbo in seven days.
Don’t feel too bad for the Louisiana native. First, gumbo is delicious. Second, Orgeron’s bandwidth for gumbo consumption seems to have few limits. He will be honored by his hometown of Larose, La., later this month for a “Coach O Day” banquet, and according to a press release, Orgeron specially requested gumbo as a menu item.
* * *
To close out this quarterback-centric column—especially rooted in the theme of desperation—let’s take the temperature of how beat writers for quarterback-needy teams are assessing the shallow draft pool.




MOBILE, Ala. — That dateline isn’t entirely true. I’m back in Chicago, but as I flipped through my notebook during the flight home—and yes, I did carry around an actual red, five-by-eight-inch notebook all week—I realized just how much information I gathered at the Senior Bowl. I’ll use this column to share some of those nuggets, and I’ll begin with a player who was not in Alabama, though his name was mentioned often and his presence will be a polarizing one from now until April: Joe Mixon.
Mixon, a redshirt sophomore running back from Oklahoma, is a supreme talent. He was suspended for his freshman season, 2014, for punching a woman at a local restaurant, breaking four bones in her face.

In the post-Ray Rice era, a case like Mixon’s is perplexing for NFL evaluators. On one hand, every incident is unique. On the other, Mixon’s case fits into a familiar pattern: There was little outrage until visual evidence surfaced. How does an NFL team reconcile Mixon as a player and Mixon’s as a person who once assaulted a woman, and how does a team determine whether Mixon has been rehabilitated and is worthy of a second chance?

I went down to Mobile under the assumption that Mixon would fall mightily in the draft, not because of talent or the NFL’s moral high ground, but because teams didn’t want to deal with the public relations headache. I left feeling more confused. I heard that some teams would likely remove Mixon from their draft boards altogether. However, there seemed to be a stronger sentiment that Mixon could follow the model set by Tyreek Hill, who was picked in the fifth round by the Chiefs because the Kansas City organization felt they did their diligence and had a system in place to support Hill. I got a strong indication that Mixon might not plummet that far, and be picked up by the third or fourth round. As it was explained to me: “Had this incident just happened, no doubt Mixon would dive. But teams have had enough time to do their homework.” Scouts who visited Oklahoma this past year say that the coaching staff has endorsed Mixon glowingly. While that factors into the draft decision, ultimately I believe a team will take Mixon for one reason only: They are willing to withstand public backlash because they know he can help them win.

* * *
A few other entries from a week in Mobile…

* * *

* * *





* * *







* * *





* * *

* * *

However I’ll end this column with one leftover travel note. On Tuesday, I took an Uber from practice and got to chatting with my driver. When he found out I was from out of town, he asked if I wanted a lunch recommendation.
“Sure,” I said. “I already ate lunch but I’m always game for local spots to check out later in the week.”

I sat quietly for 30 seconds, dumbfounded. The guy went on. “It’s so refreshing. Really, on a hot day, nothing is better.”
I’m still unsure if this guy knows Jimmy John’s is a national chain, or perhaps he’s just really proud of his sandwich shop hack. I actually considered going to JJ’s later in the week, but chickened out when I wondered if ordering “the lettuce wrap” was actually code for picking up drugs.


MOBILE, Alabama — Greetings from the Port City, as Draft Season is officially underway. Senior Bowl practices wrapped up on Thursday, concluding a week that began (for me, at least) with a tornado warning hours before and after touching down on Saturday. (Luckily it was just that, a warning). I’ve heard the same sentiment repeated by scouts, coaches and personnel guys: This is an especially deep pool of talent at the Senior Bowl, perhaps the best of the past few years. And yet, unless you’re a draftnik, there aren’t too many big names down here.
But big names around this time of year are always quarterbacks, and when Deshaun Watson declined his invite (he was eligible as a junior since he had graduated), the already-shallow senior quarterback pool was quite dry. However in talking to folks in Mobile before practices began, there was a belief that two of the six quarterbacks competing here could strengthen their stock—the ceiling being “the next Dak Prescott.” Those guys: Nathan Peterman of Pittsburgh and Davis Webb of California.
We’ll begin with Peterman because he’s been by far the most impressive quarterback here. Says one evaluator who has studied Peterman extensively: “He reminds me a lot of Kirk Cousins in this sense: He’s not going to blow you away with any of his traits, but he can do everything you need.” The evaluator stressed that Peterman is very mature. A graduate transfer from Tennessee, he enrolled at Pitt in 2015 to pursue an MBA and the 22-year-old got married to his longtime girlfriend in April.


* * *
Webb is an interesting case. Coming into the week, one evaluator was effusive about his potential. “He’s put up nearly identical numbers to Goff, playing in the same exact offense,” the evaluator noted.
He’s right. Webb’s final season at Cal: 61.6% completions, 4,295 yards, 37 touchdowns, 12 interceptions.
Goff’s final season at Cal: 64.5% completions, 4,714 yards, 43 touchdowns and 13 interceptions.
The evaluator: “He’s bigger than Goff, sturdier, and has a much stronger arm. Goff might have been more accurate, but I don’t think [Webb] gets enough credit.” One knock on Webb is that he could not win the starting job at Texas Tech in 2015, losing out to Patrick Mahomes. Adding a layer of complexity, though: Webb was named a captain at two different schools, which is a huge plus in the leadership department. He flew into Mobile on Friday night, two days earlier than the rest of his peers.
“I kind of wanted to just adjust my body clock and acclimate to the surroundings down here,” he told me Thursday night after practice. “It’s a long trip from LAX and you know, things happen with delays, etc. I didn’t want to risk being delayed, missing a meeting. Plus, I wanted a chance to explore Mobile. I ate at a really good pizza place.” Once Webb landed, he scrambled to arrange a throwing session with seven receivers from the local college, South Alabama.
His arm strength is worth getting excited over. Accuracy, however, could prove to be Webb’s downfall. He started a bit shaky in the first practice, not appearing wholly comfortable taking snaps under center, but was far more impressive by Day 3. The adjustment to a pro-style offense is what will be monitored closely.
“Obviously I know there’s always the label of being an ‘Air Raid Guy,’ not working under center, it’s the same stuff that Jared went through,” Webb says. “But I’ve been working with Jim Zorn as my coach and I’m getting a lot more comfortable at it. I haven’t had to huddle up and use that verbiage and do the snap count, but that doesn’t mean I’m not capable of it. I think I’ve done a little better at every practice than the last, and I’m showing teams that I can pick things up quickly.”
Webb is on the South roster, coached by the Browns staff. It’s too early to gauge his Senior Bowl performance; he could wow at the game, at the very least proving he can pick up new concepts in a short period of time. And Webb is right—he has improved throughout the week.

* * *
Alabama tight end O.J. Howard is a Bama boy; his hometown, Prattville, Ala. is smack-middle of the state. “I wanted to come to the Senior Bowl because it was down here in Mobile,” Howard says. “But also to make a great first introduction to these NFL teams. I know some people out there might say I’m the top tight end in the class, but nothing is certain and I want to prove my case that I’m the guy.”
And so Howard accepted his invite. There was only one conflict: Prattville was planning on having an O.J. Howard Day, complete with a parade, this weekend. When Howard accepted his Senior Bowl invitation, O.J. Howard Day wasn’t cancelled—it was moved, 180 miles down the road. Instead of a parade, a group of 150 Prattville residents will have a big tailgate at Ladd-Peebles Stadium. “Man, I don’t even know the details,” Howard says. “That’s all my mom’s doing.”
And Howard looks like he made the right call, coming to Mobile. One scout told me on Wednesday that Howard is “definitely the top” tight end in 2017, proving he’s a polished pass-catcher (even if he wasn’t maximized as a receiver in the Crimson Tide’s offense) and a very willing blocker. He shined in Day 1 with at least two one-handed catches and a nice grab while beating former teammate Ryan Anderson on a one-on-one drill, with Nick Saban watching from the sidelines.

* * *





Honestly, nothing has been weirder than your question of what kind of cereal I like. That’s probably the craziest thing someone has asked me. Everything has been pretty routine. So far, I guess.

* * *









I watched her reveal deep emotional scars at her civil trial last March, and when we met up last May when I was in Los Angeles for another assignment, I told her I thought she had a story to tell. Before I met Erin, I had only known her as the world does: in the role of glossy sideline reporter. But there was something so powerful as she disclosed part of her true self—vulnerable, wounded, but strong enough to take a stand for a gross violation of her privacy—and that message felt important to share for all women.

It’s O.K. not to be O.K. You also have the right to fight back; she set a model for victims of so many of these kinds of crimes to say you can go pursue these cases in court. We bounced the idea around about the story as fall approached—the angle: how the 2016 football season would mark her return to normalcy—but it didn’t work out. I circled back about a month ago, to see if she’d be interested in doing the piece. She said yes, cryptically telling me there “had been a lot of developments over the past few months.”
And so I met her in Green Bay on Jan. 8, in advance of the wild-card game between the Packers and Giants. That’s when she disclosed another bombshell: She was diagnosed with cervical cancer in September. Even as life threw Erin another curveball, so many of the themes from our initial conversation remained the same. It was important for her to do what she loves and focus on the things she could control. Even as the outside world perceived something about her or tried to frame her story, only she knew the pain she endured. And she found the strength to pull through, without missing a day of work.



Left guard Lane Taylor: “We knew if we gave him a little time, it could work out for us.”

Lang: “You react to the defense. You can tell when the ball is about to go by the way they rush. I knew by the way he was moving of where Aaron was moving.”

Lang: “It took a while. We understand there’s times we need to extend the play. Our guys aren’t open and Aaron needs us. We’re used to it, we will block however long it takes, you just need to stay in front of your guy.”

Packers defensive back Ha-Ha Clinton Dix: “I’m watching from the sideline, and you just have to appreciate that. You marvel at it. For a defensive back, it’s so hard to stay matched with your coverage when the quarterback holds the ball that long, eventually something will give. [Rodgers] does it better than anyone. I’m lucky he’s on my side and I don’t have to go against that.”

Taylor: “We’d block for infinity. However long it takes.”
Lang: “The more reps you have at it, the better you are at it. When you play with Aaron for a while, let’s just say you have a lot of experience in plays like this.”

Taylor: “But also…. I was exhausted. I’d keep going if I needed to, but I knew I needed to catch my breath soon.”
Lang: “Those plays catch you up. You feel like you just want to sit on the bench and… recover.”

Coach Mike McCarthy: “He has spoiled all of us around here for a long time.”
There’s something frightening about Rodgers when he’s in complete serenity. There’s something even more dangerous about Rodgers when it looks like the world is closing in around him.
In the eight seconds that Rodgers dodged, ducked, dipped and dodged —assessing and seizing opportunity though chaos—he demonstrated why he’s the quarterback no team wants to face in January. He is immune to circumstance. This first touchdown proved to be the turning point in the Packers’ 38–13 wild card win over  New York on Sunday night—nothing was in doubt moving forward. Rodgers finished with 362 passing yards and four touchdowns. The Packers blaze into next weekend’s Divisional Round game against the Cowboys as winners of seven straight; Rodgers has delivered 19 touchdowns and zero interceptions in that span.
While his California cool creates statements like “R-E-L-A-X” and “run the table,” which inevitably become rallying cries, it’s his poise in eight seconds of panic that punctuate his legend. 
In a sit down interview with FOX’s Erin Andrews, filmed Friday afternoon, Rodgers explained his “run the table” turnaround: “I think we needed a jolt of confidence, a reminder from the top that we  can do this. That’s why I said what I said. I’m not a prophet. I’m just a confident person…..”—then he punched back at his critics —“There comes a time in all of our lives, professionally and personally, where it feels good to be able to take the narrative back.” The narrative of these Packers, ever since a shellacking by Washington on Nov. 20 that dropped Green Bay to 4–6, is nothing short of stunning.
Consider this game as a microcosm of the Packers season. Through his first three drives, Rodgers had as many completions (three) as instances where the Giants defense swarmed him for a sack. (Make no mistake: New York wasn’t pass rushing as much as it was clogging ground). On the third time Rodgers went down, capping a drive where he was bolstered by a 32-yard pass interference penalty, boos crept through the chilled stadium, just as the skies began to darken. The Packers punted on each of their first five possessions for the first time since Week 3…..in 2012. This is a New York defense that allowed an NFL-low 15.3 points per game since Halloween. And to pile on: safety valve Jordy Nelson, the wide receiver who led the NFL with 14 touchdowns this season, exited the game with a rib injury. He would not return.
The Eight Second Spectacular serves as Rodgers’s “run the table moment” for Sunday’s game. His next score, a Hail Mary secured by Randall Cobb to end the half that felt surprisingly inevitable, represented how he wins in style. The Hail Mary was Rodgers’s third in 13 months. “I can throw it pretty good, but it has to happen on the other end as well,” says Rodgers, who said his play reminded him of Doug Flutie’s famed Boston College pass.
It wasn’t exactly easy sailing from there. Late in the third quarter, the Packers were stunted on a fourth-down conversion. Immediately after, the Giants receivers awoke from hibernation. Perhaps more notable than the highly-publicized Miami boat soiree is that Odell Beckham, through his college and professional career, had not played in a game where temperatures dipped below 32 degrees. Or that he is one of 16 starters on New York’s roster without postseason experience. Beckham had two drops in the first half, one in the end zone. His group warmed when Eli Manning hit Tavarres King for a 41-yard touchdown over the middle to pull within one, 14–13.
But after that, Rodgers was damn methodical. By his last throwing score, a third touchdown strike to Randall Cobb, which bolstered the lead to 31–13, Rodgers barely reacted. He stood on the exact hash he threw from as each of his offensive lineman came to tap him on the helmet. Rodgers walked, slowly, calmly, to the sideline. He hugged Cobb on the walk back. He hugged McCarthy on the sideline. This routine took nearly eighty seconds.
The Packers have averaged 31 points per game through their six-game winning streak which led them here. It’s only fitting that Rodgers elevated to 38 points when the stakes were highest—win or go home.
Nelson’s status will be one to monitor over the week. McCarthy did not have an update post-game but said “obviously I’m concerned for Jordy.”
The Packers now take their show on the road, to Dallas. The Cowboys, the NFC’s hottest team all season, open as four-point favorites. There could be chaos next week at AT&T Stadium; if you’re facing Rodgers, that’s scary.











































* * *






* * *

“I played with Zay for three years; he played right away as a freshman. He’s a good kid, a really smart guy. We had quite a few one-on-ones in practice. When I was there, he was playing a little bit of slot [receiver] so I didn’t go up against him all the time, but we did have some battles outside and I can say he’s a competitor you get excited to go up against. He’s definitely ready for the league. Zay’s father [Robert Jones, a linebacker for 10 NFL seasons and 1992 first-round pick of the Cowboys] had a great career in the league, and his uncle [quarterback Jeff Blake, who played 13 NFL seasons, most notably with the Bengals] did as well, so Zay has people around him who can tell him what it’s like at the next level. But even with all of that, he’s humble. You’d never know he had that pedigree.
“He’s a speed guy, and he’s physical. If he’s in traffic, you know he’s going to be the guy who somehow comes away with the catch. Then if he has open field… he’ll get past anyone. He has great hands, too. If you haven’t seen him play, you’ll love how fun he is to watch. Check out one play, against Virginia Tech, in the rain, he makes this incredible one-handed catch. He’s a guy who studies hard and gets good grades and has a real good work ethic, but also just to get to know the real him, at parties, just hanging out, you’ll see he’s a grounded guy. I’ve seen here, with the Packers, what a top receiver looks like, and Zay has all those attributes. He’s going to be able to contribute right away to whoever drafts him.”
* * *

How crazy was that game?
At one point the Nittany Lions scored six times in the span of 16 game minutes. Penn State's first four drives ended with: interception, interception, punt, punt. The next seven drives: touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, touchdown. The last four: Punt, punt, punt, interception.
As much as it pains this Penn State alumna, congratulations to USC on a tremendous finish. A solid antidote for the “non playoff bowl games don’t matter” crowd.
Last year, the College Football Playoff semifinals were moved from New Year’s Day to New Year’s Eve, and the ratings were considered a dud. This year, viewership for both games improved, though the games taking place on a Saturday, rather than a Thursday, likely helped.
Overnights for Alabama-Washington and Clemson-Ohio State together averaged a 10.4—a six percent increase from last year’s pair of semifinals, which drew a 9.8.
Either way, the new tradition of having these semifinals on New Year’s Eve (rather than New Year’s Day) has not been a hit. Overall, viewership is down big from 2014, when semifinal games between Oregon and Florida State and Ohio State and Alabama averaged ratings of 15.4.
In ESPN’s 12-year contract, the semifinal games were originally supposed to be played on New Year’s Eve eight times though this summer. They amended the schedule so that games would be played on Saturdays in 2018, 2019, 2024 and 2025.


The 2016 MLB season featured all kinds of incredible and jaw-dropping stories, from the Cubs' first championship in 108 years to the retirements of Vin Scully and David Ortiz to the death of Jose Fernandez. Revisit the year in baseball with our collection of the best profiles, features and stories from around the league and beyond.






























Since this column looks at the college game through an NFL prism, I highlighted the best pro prospects in upcoming bowl games. But before we get to the bowl guide, a bit more on a minor controversy that just won’t go away…
The buzz surrounding Leonard Fournette and Christian McCaffrey’s twin decisions to bail on their bowl games has continued, so I asked two members of NFL scouting departments for their take. The response was, essentially, a shrug.
“It’s all about the tone and tenor of their announcements,” one personnel man told me. “These guys left their team in good standing, with the graces of their coaches and teammates. They gave a lot to their schools over the last few seasons, they sacrificed a lot, and so we all understand this is a business decision.” In essence: I get it, and I’m not holding it against them.
For schools, it’s not a full-blown problem… yet. Only one position (running back) seems to be affected. The two faces of this controversy are unique cases; Fournette for being physically advanced, and in the spotlight, for so long; McCaffrey for his NFL pedigree, and a father with connections and past experiences to help shape his son’s opinion. (Baylor’s Shock Linwood, who announced he’ll pass on the Cactus Bowl, is viewed by NFL types as an ill-advised copycat dealing with mitigating circumstances.) Nonetheless, I gathered proposals of what colleges should do moving forward. While many cautioned against anything drastic, everyone agreed college athletics should be forward thinking, and perhaps a bit unconventional. Here are a few ideas, some more feasible than others.
• Allow schools to buy single-game loss of value insurance for its draft prospects. This idea was presented by NFLPA President Eric Winston in his conversation with Albert Breer for last week’s Game Plan, and I love it. We’ve heard of players taking out insurance policies on themselves, a trend popularized after Willis McGahee’s injury in the 2002 Fiesta Bowl. Notre Dame’s Jayson Smith collected $900,000 after slipping to the second round; Oregon cornerback Ifo Ekpre-Olomu, a potential 2015 first-round pick, collected $3 million after tearing his ACL in a practice before for a playoff game against Florida State. He fell to the seventh round.
Winston says if colleges are so concerned about financial losses when star players skip out on bowl games, take action. Surely someone could sell LSU an insurance policy before the season that would let the school recover its losses if Fournette decides not to play.
Says Winston: “Most schools could afford one game loss of value insurance if they really wanted these guys to play. Everybody’s making a decision, including the colleges, including the coaches who leave for the bowl game, but for some reason we’re demonizing players for making these decisions for themselves… Let’s not act like there aren’t other people that could take care of it, if this was such a desperate thing where we gotta have these guys play.”
• Change scholarship language where players must sign a clause saying they will not voluntarily sit out a bowl game. If they do, they will have to repay the school back a certain amount of money. This idea was presented by a college scouting director, partially tongue-in-cheek, as what an aggressive athletic department might attempt to curtail this trend. I could see an overzealous coach wanting to try it, and I could see it backfiring quickly. Among the plethora of issues here: It seems awfully tricky to regulate. For example, while McCaffrey was theoretically healthy enough to play in the bowl game, he could argue in court that there were lingering ailments that prevented him from participating fully. A third-party doctor would have to make the call.
• Incentivize bowl play by uncapping the gifts. This probably wouldn’t be enough to convince Fournette and McCaffrey to change their minds, but it’s a step closer to compensating college football players for what they’re worth. And hey, maybe the Citrus Bowl, and/or sponsor Buffalo Wild Wings, would be willing to shell out $40,000 to have Fournette grace the field. The NCAA allows bowl committees to spend $550 on each player. Contrast that to James Franklin, coach of my alma mater, Penn State, who gets a $200,000 bonus if his team plays in any bowl game. (That’s around the industry standard). If bowl games are so special, let’s give the players something a little bigger than an Apple Watch for their efforts.
• As a way to recoup excitement in non-playoff bowl games, a few people proposed a wholesale change, allowing bowl games to be a springboard into the next season: Let redshirts and transfers play, without the typical consequences. This idea was articulated by colleague Andy Staples of Campus Rush, who explains the benefits not only for the fan, but coaches managing depleted rosters at the end of the season. All around, people in football I talked to seem to celebrate this idea, though many wonder if the NCAA would ever allow it. There’s a counterpoint to this: As one well-respected agent reminds me, coaches already treat bowl games as a start to the next season. “I bet you can’t count how many seniors were replaced by younger players, happens all the time. Senior gets a lot less reps and feels demoted.” These seniors represent the draft’s middle to lower class, and for these players a bowl game is viewed as an NFL tryout. Is there a way to appease everyone? Probably not. That’s why this situation is so prickly.
• WHO IS MITCH TRUBISKY?: It’s the question evaluators across the league are scrambling to answer as the first-year UNC starter has established himself as the best draft-eligible quarterback in college football.
* * *
WHAT I’M WATCHING
All times Eastern…
Everything! Well, I’m trying to. I love bowl season, and from now until the national title game (Jan. 9), there’s plenty of compelling college football on television. Consider this The Handy MMQB College Column Bowl Viewing Guide, with an emphasis on NFL draft prospects.
* * *
Pinstripe Bowl: Northwestern vs. PittsburghWednesday, 2 p.m.
Wildcats junior linebacker Anthony Walker is an intriguing prospect. He could be the first Northwestern player to leave early for the NFL in 20 years. After a breakout 2015, Walker’s tape early this season wasn’t great, but scouts believe he was still battling nagging injuries, and he’s regaining momentum. Meanwhile Pittsburgh boasts a few pro prospects, notably running back James Conner. Offensive tackle Adam Bisnowaty should be an NFL starter. From The MMQB’s Anonymous Scout, in September: “Long arms and a powerful punch. Plays nasty. Nice kick slide. Some might consider sliding him to guard but I like him [in the NFL] as a tackle.”
* * *
Russell Athletic Bowl: Miami vs. West VirginiaWednesday, 5:30 p.m.
The big name here is Brad Kaaya, Miami’s big-bodied, pro-style passer. The junior has not yet declared his intentions for 2017, but you can bet NFL teams will be on hand to see how he preforms. On offense, Kaaya’s go-to receiver, Stacy Coley, and tight end David Njoku, are other names to watch. Look for cornerback Corn Elder and safety Rayshawn Jenkins as late-round picks. Center Tyler Orlosky is the Mountaineers’ best pro prospect. Defensive back Rasul Douglas is a borderline Day 2 pick (a good fit for teams who covet tall, physical corners).
• NFL EYES ON THE HEISMAN CANDIDATES: What scouts think of the Heisman winner Lamar Jackson and the other four finalists.
* * *
Foster Farms Bowl: Indiana vs. UtahWednesday, 8:30 p.m.
It’s a thin draft for offensive linemen, but Indiana guard Dan Feeney would stand out any year. A four-year starter, he was a big reason why Tevin Coleman and Jordan Howard thrived as Hoosiers. In September, The MMQB’s Anonymous Scout raved about Feeney for his long arms, good punch, and good agility for his size. Stay in the trenches because Utah’s defensive lineman, Lowell Lotulelei (brother of the Panthers’ Star Lotulelei) is a 6' 2″, 310-pound force. The Anonymous Scout report: “Strong at point of attack, but often relies on sheer power and strength. Needs to improve handwork. Run stuffer, not every down player, future is nose tackle.” Utes junior safety Marcus Williams is also supremely talented, and a potential first-round pick if he declares.
* * *
Texas Bowl: Kansas St. vs. Texas A&MWednesday, 9 p.m. 
The marquee player here is Myles Garrett, the freakishly athletic defensive end who spent most of the season as the leading candidate to be the draft’s top pick. (He’ll definitely play in this game, after emphatically declaring himself not among the bowl-skipping crowd). Aggies strong safety Justin Evans has been a big riser since mid-season while defensive end Daeshon Hall (6' 6″, 270 pounds) is an excellent pass-rusher and worth monitoring. Linebacker Jordan Willis is Kansas State’s top draft prospect.
* * *
Birmingham Prime Bowl: South Carolina vs. South FloridaThursday, 2 p.m.
It’s not a great year for Gamecocks entering the pros; Darius English, a defensive end, is likely a late-round pick. South Florida has a junior running back, Marlon Mack, receiving some NFL attention and could end up in the mid-rounds.
* * *
Belk Prime Bowl: Arkansas vs. Virginia TechThursday, 5:30 p.m. 
Let’s call this the Tight End Bowl, presented by Belk. Earlier this season, this column examined an abnormally strong year for tight ends, and two of the top prospects will be pitted against each other here. For Arkansas, it’s Jeremy Sprinkle (who could slide to the fourth-to-sixth round range, if only because of the plethora of prospects this year). For Virginia Tech, Bucky Hodges is the hot name, should the junior declare. With the combination of size, strength, and freakish athleticism, Hodges creates the classic mismatches that you see with Travis Kelce or Rob Gronkowski at the NFL level.
* * *
Alamo Prime Bowl: Colorado vs. Oklahoma St. Thursday, 9 p.m. 
The Buffaloes’ secondary features three draftable players in cornerback Chidobe Awuzie, strong safety Tedric Thompson and cornerback Ahkello Witherspoon. Awuzie is the best of the bunch, a versatile defender who lines up everywhere—including some time rushing the passer. Oklahoma State quarterback Mason Rudolph is a polarizing prospect among scouts; the junior has yet to declare, and his performance in this game—against a terrific secondary—should be telling. Also look out for these Cowboys: defensive tackle Vincent Taylor, free safety Jordan Sterns and tight end Blake Jarwin.
* * *
Arizona Bowl: Air Force vs. South AlabamaFriday, 5:30 p.m. 
One of my favorite small-school prospects this year is South Alabama tight end Gerald Everett. The senior is a (6' 4″, 240 pounds) transfer from UAB is a physical and willing blocker with excellent hands. Even in a deep year for tight ends, Everett holds up among the best. Weston Steelhammer, a safety, is Air Force’s best prospect. He’s a late-round pick.
* * *
Liberty Bowl: Georgia vs. TCUFriday, noon
This is the Bulldogs’ least-impressive draft class in recent memory. Running backs Nick Chubb and Sony Michel both decided to stay for their senior seasons, meaning both are top prospects to watch for 2018. Offensive guard Greg Pyke could be a mid-round pick. TCU edge rusher Josh Carraway is the most promising prospect for the Horned Frogs; scouts project him as a 3-4 outside linebacker in the NFL.
* * *
Sun Bowl: North Carolina vs. StanfordDec. 30. 2 p.m. 
No Christian McCaffrey, but this still a must-watch game for scouts. The Sun Bowl has Mitch Trubisky to thank for that. I profiled the UNC quarterback last week, and NFL evaluators have tabbed him as the top draft-eligible quarterback. The biggest knock against Trubisky is that there’s limited tape—he’s a first-year starter—so a good showing against a traditionally good Stanford defense would resonate. Ryan Switzer, Trubisky’s favorite wide receiver, is worth watching as well. For the Cardinal defense, defensive lineman Solomon Thomas, a third-year sophomore, is a stud.
* * *
Music City Bowl: Nebraska vs. Tennessee Friday, 3:30 p.m.
Pass-rushers are always at a premium come draft time, and disruptive defensive end Derek Barnett is among the elite. Should the junior declare, he’ll be in the first round discussion—12 sacks this season plus 51 tackles for loss over his career. Also on Tennessee’s defense, cornerback Cameron Sutton and outside linebacker Jalen Reeves-Maybin are getting serious pro looks. For Nebraska, strong safety Nathan Gerry has intrigued NFL scouts with his strong tackling. He also has 13 interceptions over the last three seasons.
* * *
Orange Bowl: Florida State vs. MichiganFriday, 8 p.m. 
In October, Jim Harbaugh predicted the number of players on his rosters to be drafted would be in the double-digits. The crazy part? He might be right. Jabrill Peppers is a potential Top 5 pick if he declares (there’s discussion of where the jack-of-all-positions would fit in an NFL scheme, but the consensus among scouts seems to be a safety). Other highly sought-after Wolverines include tight end Jake Butt, defensive end Taco Charlton, wide receiver Jehu Chesson, offensive lineman Mason Cole wide receiver Amara Darboh, defensive tackle Ryan Glasgow, cornerback Jourdan Lewis and defensive lineman Chris Wormley. Florida State’s roster is loaded too, highlighted by potential first-round running back Dalvin Cook and potential top 50 pick, defensive end DeMarcus Walker.
• THE RETURN OF THE TIGHT END: A tight end hasn’t been taken in the first round of the draft since 2014. However, a stacked 2017 class, featuring Michigan’s Jake Butt, is poised to break that trend.
* * *
Taxslayer Bowl: Georgia Tech vs. KentuckySaturday, 11 a.m. 
Kentucky’s best prospect is center Jon Toth, a senior who has started in 47 consecutive games. There’s not a ton of talent on the Georgia Tech side, though senior center Freddie Burden has enough upside to be a late-round pick, or undrafted free agent.
* * *
Citrus Bowl: Louisville vs. LSU Saturday, 11 a.m. 
Looking ahead to 2018, you can bet NFL scouts will be watching Heisman winner Lamar Jackson closely. Evaluators told me he has a future in the NFL but they are worried that he’s too skinny, and not terribly accurate (although he has made improvements). “I think right now he’s in the same stage that Dak Prescott was in around that age,” an evaluator said. “You’re an athlete, you’re a running athlete that can throw the ball, now learn to be a passer.” Back to guys eligible this year. For Lousiville, defense is the stronger side of the ball with safety Josh Harvey-Clemons and linebackers Keith Kelsey and Devonte Fields all draftable in the fourth round or higher. Scouts also like wide receiver James Quick and have shown interest in tight end Cole Hikutini. LSU is loaded, even without Leonard Fournette (though let’s be honest, both viewers and scouts know what he’s capable of whether he plays in this game or not). Jamal Adams, the safety, could be a first-rounder. Right behind him: center Ethan Pocic, cornerback Tre’Davious White and linebacker Kendell Beckwith. Evaluators like two of the Tigers’ wideouts: Malachi Dupre and Travin Dural. Oh, and cornerback Ed Paris and defensive tackle Davon Godchaux should be late round picks. Yeah, this press box is going to be packed with NFL personnel.
• DRAFTING LISTS: Who’s moving up draft boards, who are the most polarizing prospects, who could be the next Dak Prescott and more.
* * *
Peach Bowl: Alabama vs. WashingtonSaturday, 3 p.m. 
No doubt this bowl features the most future NFL talent; we’ll focus only on players expected to enter the 2017 draft, because Nick Saban’s forever replenishing machine is dizzying to keep up with. I count six potential first-round picks on the Crimson Tide Roster: Defensive end Jonathan Allen, linebacker Reuben Foster, tight end O.J. Howard, cornerback Marlon Humphrey, offensive lineman Cam Robinson and linebacker Tim Williams. Linebacker Ryan Anderson should be drafted not long after, and safety Eddie Jackson not long after Anderson. For Washington, the group is impressive as well. Wide receiver John Ross has vaulted into first-round conversation—slight, 5' 11″ receivers have a place in today’s NFL. I’ve heard scouts comparing Ross to DeSean Jackson. Cornerback Sidney Jones could be in the first round as well. Other possible Top 50 Huskies: safety Budda Baker and defensive tackles Elijah Qualls and Vita Vea. And a final two to watch: cornerback Kevin King and offensive lineman Jake Eldrenkamp. Notice how many defensive backs there are in this group? This week Saban called Washington’s secondary “Seahawk-like.”
* * *
Fiesta Bowl: Clemson vs. Ohio State Saturday, 7 p.m. 
This is an important assessment day for Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson, who had an up-and-down season. His top receiver, Mike Williams, is the top wideout on many draft boards. Jordan Leggett is yet another terrific tight end in this year’s loaded class, while offensive guards Tyrone Crowder, running back Wayne Gallman and wide receiver Artavis Scott are underclassmen to know. On defense, there’s a borderline first-round defensive tackle in Carlos Watkins and an excellent Top 50 cornerback in Cordea Tankersley. Center Pat Elflein is the surest Buckeye prospect (he could have declared in 2016). This team won’t have a group of NFL exports like last year (after all, there are more than 40 players with freshman eligibility on the roster). Redshirt sophomore safety Malik Hooker appears poised to return to Columbus for 2017, but will be a first-round candidate next draft cycle. Linebacker Raekwon McMillan has not yet decided on his 2017 intentions, but he will be an NFL star. Four very talented underclassmen who could declare: cornerback Gareon Conley, cornerback Marshon Lattimore, defensive end Tyquan Lewis and wide receiver Curtis Samuel.
* * *
Outback Bowl: Florida vs. IowaMonday, 1 p.m. 
There’s a lot to like about Iowa’s defense, led by cornerback Desmond King. He’s a ballhawk and scouts gush over his tape; I think he’s a potential first-rounder. Defensive lineman Jaleel Johnson is getting serious looks. Iowa quarterback C.J. Beathard entered the year with hype due to his pedigree (he is the grandson to longtime NFL GM Bobby Beathard) and prototypical size, though scouts have cooled on him and project him to the late rounds. Florida cornerback Teez Tabor is a first-round candidate. There’s more to like in the Gators defense, including linebacker Jarrad Davis, defensive tackle Caleb Brantley, safety Marcus Maye and defensive end Bryan Cox Jr.
* * *
Cotton Bowl: Western Michigan vs. Wisconsin Monday, 1 p.m. 
Western Michigan wide receiver Corey Davis has been on the NFL’s radar for some time (I profiled him in September) as a potential first-round pick. Don’t sleep on other Broncos, especially offensive lineman Taylor Moton who could be plucked as high as the second round. Wisconsin’s offensive lineman Ryan Ramczyk is highly regarded. Also look out for running back Corey Clement and outside linebacker Vince Biegel. He may not declare this year, but linebacker T.J. Watt is fun to watch—he has an attitude and style that will remind you a lot of his older brother, J.J.
• FROM WESTERN MICHIGAN TO ROUND 1: He nearly missed out on college altogeher, but now record-setting wideout Corey Davis could join Randy Moss as the only MAC receivers ever taken in the NFL draft’s first round.
* * *
Rose Bowl: Penn State vs. USCMonday, 5 p.m. 
Two skill players fascinate NFL scouts very much on Southern California’s roster: wide receiver JuJu Smith-Schuster and defensive back Adoree’ Jackson. Both players have teased a return to USC for their senior seasons but will still be heavily monitored by NFL evaluators. On the offensive line, Chad Wheeler and Zach Banner should go within the first four rounds. I featured Banner in November; he’s 6' 9″ and once weighed nearly 400 pounds but has slimmed down—and his NFL future depends on him keeping it off. As for my alma mater? It’s not a great year for Nittany Lions in the draft. I’ve heard some buzz about linebacker Brandon Bell, who had an excellent second half. If you really want to get excited though, watch stud running back Saquon Barkley. He’s not eligible until 2018, but he’s flashing all the qualities of a first-rounder.
* * *
Sugar Bowl: Auburn vs. OklahomaMonday, 8:30 p.m.
With Oklahoma quarterback Baker Mayfield announcing he will return for his senior season—a move generally applauded by NFL types, who felt he would slide in the draft—the big name for Oklahoma is fellow Heisman finalist, wide receiver Dede Westbrook. Here’s an NFL evaluator’s take on Westbrook from my column earlier this month: “Right now I’d say he’s a third- to fourth-round guy, who could move to be a second-round guy based off what he does in the Senior Bowl and combine… I love his body control, you watch that touchdown in the Baylor game, where he somehow stayed in bounds, that was one of the most unbelievable touchdowns I’ve seen this year. The average athlete does not stay in bounds.” Junior running back Samaje Perine is still deciding whether or not to go pro while Joe Mixon has already decided to return in 2017. Not featured in this game is defensive lineman Charles Walker, who left the program in November to begin his draft preparations. Auburn defensive end Carl Lawson flashes first-round talent and defensive tackle Montravius Adams improved his draft stock immensely by returning for his senior season. The Tigers may actually have the best draft-eligible kicker in the nation in Daniel Carlson. Two other Tigers with mid-round grades: offensive lineman Braden Smith and safety Jonathan Ford.
Question or comment? Email us at talkback@themmqb.com.
This article originally appeared on 

When Mitch Trubisky took his first recruiting visit to UNC as a high school junior, he was hosted by the Tar Heels’ starting quarterback, Bryn Renner. Renner was an upperclassman, and veteran of this drill. He met Trubisky at the football building knowing only what he needed to: The teenager was from Ohio. And the coaches wanted him bad.
“Anytime a high schooler comes by, you go, ‘O.K., let’s see what this kid is about,’” Renner says. So Renner took Trubisky to his off-campus house, and revved up FIFA with his roommate, running back (and future Cincinnati Bengal) Giovani Bernard.
Renner and Bernard bantered, kicked their feet up on the coffee table, traded taunts. Trubisky sat on the couch in silence. “Come on man,” Bernard said to the recruit, handing him a controller. “We have to break you in, we got to get you more fiery.”
Trubisky cautiously took control. A few minutes later, he scored his first goal. A few minutes after that, he teased Renner for his spotty defense. “And then he started giving it back to us,” Renner says. “He was scoring goals, doing fist pumps, getting up and cheering. It was like [the Adam Sandler movie] The Waterboy, when he opens a can of whoop-ass. Gio and I were like, What did we just unleash?”

It took Trubisky four years to display that, ahem, whoop-ass on the football field. He redshirted in 2013. In ’14 and ’15 he backed up Marquise Williams. When he finally got the nod this season, Trubisky introduced himself with oomph. He completed 69 percent of his passes for 3,468 yards, 28 touchdowns and only four interceptions during the regular season. He’s 6′ 3″, 220 pounds and looks as comfortable standing in the pocket as he does scooting outside and throwing on the move. Though UNC’s offense is a fairly basic variation of the spread, Trubisky’s quick release and tight spirals prove he can make every throw a top-tier quarterback needs to. His clean-shaven face gives him a boyish look, but his presence exudes anything but “first-year starter.” In a Sept. 24 comeback victory over Pittsburgh, Trubisky faced fourth-and-6 or longer three times on the game-winning drive, and converted on each.
For NFL teams, there’s a significant challenge in evaluating one-year starters. On one hand, there’s Auburn’s Cam Newton in 2010. On the other, consider Akili Smith. A junior college transfer, Smith had 11 spectacular starts at Oregon and was drafted No. 3 overall by the Bengals in 1999. He made 17 career starts and posted a 52.8 passer rating. But in a thin year for draft-eligible quarterbacks, NFL teams desperately seeking a franchise QB have honed in on their prize. By mid-season, national scouts began making pilgrimages to Chapel Hill. One NFL evaluator called it “the biggest mid-year scramble I’ve seen in a while.” By December, the 22-year-old Trubisky was on the back page of a tabloid, The New York Daily News (naturally, linking him to the Jets.)

Trubisky’s take: “What am I doing on the cover of a tabloid? Me, in a tabloid? I just don’t get it. You go from nobody talking to you, even people talking bad about you. [As recently as] last year you’d hear people say, ‘He’s a horrible quarterback’—now being projected as one of the top quarterbacks taken if I decide to come out? That’s a crazy thing.”
Trubisky received a first-round grade from the NFL Draft Advisory panel. He still has one year of eligibility left. He says he will take time between the Dec. 30 Sun Bowl and Jan. 16 deadline to evaluate. His family, too, is scrambling with a new reality. “Our whole timeline is thrown off,” says his mother, Jeanne. “We thought he’d have one more year. Now we know we’re all going to have to regroup after the bowl game. We’ll see what his plans are, talk it out, and make sure he makes the right decision.”
Meanwhile, with only limited tape, NFL teams are racing to fill in as much info as possible. What they’ve learned: Mitch Trubisky lifts like a linebacker. He was homesick his first year of college. He likes playing Pictionary with his two younger brothers. His family of six makes an annual 18-hour drive to visit grandparents in Florida—and though Mitch has made only one of the last four, his 2016 New Year’s resolution was to call his family more often. He’ll never let a text from his high school coach go unreturned. He’s so popular in his hometown (Mentor, a suburb of Cleveland) that Tar Heel blue became the trendiest shirt color among school kids this fall. He’s reserved upon first introduction (when he called me earlier this week, he introduced himself as if he were cold calling to sell a new line of ski products: “Hello, this is Mitchell Trubisky, the quarterback at the University of North Carolina”), but fearless once comfortable.
And another thing: Trubisky has always had the pedigree to warrant this opportunity. He just needed someone to hand him the controller.

Trubisky might have been born to play football. His parents met as flag football teammates at the University of Akron. Jeanne was a three-sport high school athlete, Dave played four sports. The genes passed on. “He put a pair of skates on, he could skate; put him on a diving board, he’d dive,” Jeanne says. “I don’t meant to sound brag-ish, he was just one of those kids who was good at everything.”
Above all, football was his love. In elementary school, he volunteered as a ball boy at varsity games. In middle school, he went to football practice in the afternoon, then came home and ran his own practice in the evening—directing his two younger brothers, Manning and Mason, on routes as younger sister Mariah hiked the ball as a center. He made varsity as a freshman and was a starter as a sophomore. “We were a spread team, and threw a lot,” says Mentor’s head coach, Steve Trivisonno. “But Mitch’s junior year, we really didn’t have a running back, so he had to do most of the running too.” As a senior, he’d be named Ohio’s Mr. Football, becoming the first quarterback in the Greater Cleveland area to ever throw for more than 9,000 career yards.
Ohio’s Mr. Football wanted to go to Ohio State. The Buckeyes made an offer. “But before he was able to accept it, he finds out J.T. Barrett accepted first,” Trivisonno recalls. “Then he has an offer from Michigan State, and he’s thinking about it, but another kid took it right before he did.” It was spring of Trubisky’s junior year, and his recruitment reset. Meanwhile, Larry Fedora had just inherited the North Carolina program, and gave his offensive coordinator, Blake Anderson, control to pick his quarterback. Anderson grew up in Arkansas, played at Baylor, and had most recently coached at Southern Mississippi. Translation: he typically recruits in the South.
“I had never really gone up to the Northeast or Midwest, but there was another kid in Ohio I really liked,” Anderson recalls. That kid: DeShone Kizer.
“As I’m finding out more about Kizer, Trubisky’s name kept coming up,” Anderson says. “I wanted to find out more about him.”

Spring recruiting for college coaches is akin to the recon work NFL scouts do on college campuses. It was a no-contact period, meaning Anderson would visit Ohio but not communicate with Trubisky. Being his first recruit at UNC, Anderson wanted to make sure he got it right. He spent seven hours at Mentor High School. He got burgers with the Mentor coaches. He talked to a dozen people at the school, from the secretary to the principal, and asked what they thought of Trubisky. “They said all the things you want to hear: He cares about others, he has a good work ethic. These two things always came up: He’s a great kid, he loves his family,” Anderson says. “But what sold me was how he practiced.”
Mentor closed with a team period, offense versus defense. The coaches let Trubisky run it. “He called plays, formations, everything,” Anderson says. “It was like watching a coach on the field. It was like watching a seasoned vet, not a junior in high school. I mean, it’s stuff I hope our college players can do.” UNC offered Trubisky a scholarship the next day. Trubisky’s recruitment tour had spanned seven states. When he told his parents he wanted to add North Carolina, Jeanne sighed. “Honey, we’re out of money,” she told her son. Trivisonno ended up going as a chaperone. “He wasn’t even off the plane yet and he was telling us he was ready to commit,” Jeanne recalls. “I said, ‘alright, let’s settle down,’ but he said, ‘No, mom, this is it. This is where I belong.’”
Renner has one other vivid memory from Trubisky’s recruiting visit. After playing FIFA, they talked about life. Trubisky mentioned his goals; he gushed about his family. Recalls Renner: “When Mitch left, I remember Gio [Bernard] said, ‘That’s a mature guy right there. There’s something about him.’”
The first question NFL teams pose about Trubisky is this: If he’s so good, why did it take him so long to get on the field? Renner’s last season was 2013, opening a competition between Trubisky and dual threat QB Marquise Williams, two years ahead of Trubiksy and an effective fill-in for an injured Renner. Many inside the North Carolina program describe a tense, seesawing battle entering the ’14 season. Fedora ultimately chose Williams, perhaps due in part to seniority, though he utilized a two-quarterback system, putting Trubisky on the field. “It was hard, at times,” Trubisky says. “That first year, that was the farthest I’ve been from my family ever. They were nine hours away, and with my two brothers and my sister all competing in sports, they couldn’t always make the trip. I was really homesick. Then when things don’t quite go as you’d like, you learn about yourself. I’m so appreciative of everyone who supported me but there were times where I had doubts.”
Renner spent time with the Broncos and Ravens, plus a cup of coffee with three other teams (he made it to the final cut down with the Steelers last summer). When he graduated, he offered this advice to Trubisky: You have to create your own opportunities. “Reps are few and far between,” Renner said to his mentee. “You might have to stay after with the guys to get throws in. That’s what I did when T.J. [Yates] was here, and that’s what you might need to do.” As Renner soaked in more time in NFL quarterback rooms, he brought other tidbits. “When I saw how Peyton Manning, and [Joe] Flacco prepared, and all those guys behind them, you learn that mental reps do mean something,” Renner says.

When Renner returned to UNC for spring practices last April, he noticed something: Trubisky had learned. He was seeing the field more clearly. He was playing with poise, as if he’d been there before.
“I don’t know when it clicked for me, but it was just this realization that as a quarterback, you can decide how good you want to be, it all comes down to staying locked in at practice,” Trubisky says. “I’d stand behind the other quarterback taking the rep and go through it every single time. I thought, Where would I go with the ball? What footwork would I do? If I physically wasn’t going to take the rep, I was going to mentally take it.”
As for the wave of attention? He’s riding it. “Really, the weirdest thing has been random people Tweeting at me,” he says. “That’s something I might never get used to.”
Adds mom: “He thinks it’s funny when people want his autograph. He’ll say, ‘That’s silly, why do they want that?’ Mitch is someone who has always had the spotlight on him, but doesn’t react to it. Really, what you see on the field is how he is off it. He’s not quiet, he’s just not showy. He’ll rarely celebrate. Sometimes he’s probably internalizing, but he internalizes well. That’s what makes him a good quarterback.”
Earlier this month, Renner returned to Chapel Hill to attend a basketball game. He texted Trubisky, and the two grabbed dinner.
“I expected him to be nervous,” Renner says. “I was freaking out when I was in his position. I said, ‘You have such a big decision to make, are you nervous at all?’”
“Nope,” Mitch said. Then he placed an order for nachos.
“It’s crazy, he was just same old Mitch,” Renner says.
In the corner of the restaurant, TVs played the college awards program. Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson was accepting the Davey O’Brien award, as the nation’s best quarterback.
Renner saw Trubisky’s eyes hone in. “I should be there,” he muttered.
Responded Renner: “You know what, it’s almost better that you’re not. You can fly under the radar and go make a real statement.”
* * *

PICK MY GUY
A current NFL player explains why his former collegiate teammate is destined for success as a pro. Here’s Bears wide receiver Daniel Braverman hyping former Western Michigan teammate Corey Davis.
“He’s an animal, he’s a beast. I was so blessed to play with a guy like that; that’s a future first-round pick. He’s a great friend of mine, we still talk a lot, but I can say, unbiased, that nobody matches his hard work and determination. He would come early to meetings, he would stay late after practice to do extra reps. He would be in the football building watching film later than anyone. He was always in [wide receivers coach Matt] Simon’s office watching extra film on his computer when everybody else had left. That’s who Corey is. He has a drive because of what he has gone through early in his life. Pretty much every game he’s making one freak play—at least. Every game this year I’ve watched, I’ve seen a play where I say, ‘How does he do that?’ But that’s Corey Davis and what Corey Davis does. I’ve seen what it takes to be a receiver in this league, what the pros do preparation wise, and you can note: Corey Davis is going to be a star NFL receiver.”
A few NFL evaluators introduce you to the players they’re keeping an eye on…
Chidobe Awuzie, CB, Colorado: Impressed by his versatility; he lines up everywhere. Strong in run support. Speed and instincts are there. He makes plays with his eyes.
Haason Reddick, DE/LB, Temple: Great motor. High effort guy who covers a lot of ground. Can consistently set the edge. Concerns: He doesn’t win with power. Think he’ll project best at outside linebacker.
Solomon Thomas, DL, Stanford : He’s a stud, if he declares this year [Thomas is a third-year sophomore]. Very active hands, quick in shedding blocks. Flexible body with good control. Emotional leader.
SAVAGE’S SENIORS
Former NFL GM and current Reese’s Senior Bowl Executive Director Phil Savage previews the position groups for the 2017 Senior Bowl. Practices in Mobile begin Tuesday, January 24.
With so many college offenses going heavy on three- and four-wide receiver sets, virtually every defense is in a four-man defensive front most of the time. This evolution has led to the emergence of the hybrid defensive end/outside linebacker that can get after the passer. Next month in Mobile, a wide variety of pass rushers will be on display, including some that translate to the OLB spot: Alabama’s Ryan Anderson, Wisconsin’s Vince Biegel, UCLA’s Tak McKinley and Carroll Phillips of Illinois. In addition, we have invites out to Alabama’s Tim Williams and Auburn’s Carl Lawson.
Question or comment? Email us at talkback@themmqb.com.
This article originally appeared on 




“Obviously teams haven’t done full evaluations on him yet, being that he’s an underclassman. But when a guy is in the spotlight this young, especially as a Heisman winner, it gives teams plenty of time to do their research. Sometimes too much time. You want to see how he’s going to react to being in the spotlight, after acclaim at a young age. He’s only 19. [Posing with] Johnny Manziel [for a] photo after the Heisman… hanging in the hotel room… it wasn’t a great look, but you’re not going to hold it against him. You are going to see what types of things he gets into off the field. Over the next year, you’re going to be able to nit-pick everything, find out everything. You look at a situation like [North Carolina quarterback] Mitch Trubisky who comes out of nowhere and now teams are all scrambling to get as much information as we can; this is the opposite of that.
“When you look at his body composition, the first thing you notice is his frame. He’s skinny, very skinny. You worry that if he can’t bulk up he will have a hard time absorbing some hits when he gets to the next level. He didn’t have the best offensive line and his receivers dropped quite a few balls. That said, he’s been less than a 60 percent passer both this season and last season. I do think he’s gotten a lot better with accuracy, but you’re going to want to see improvement.
“He has a future in the NFL, no doubt, I just think we need to see a little more from him to see where he fits in. Yes, he’s a runner, but he’s a talented runner. Very talented. I’d like to know more about his football IQ. It seems like the coaches simplified a lot of the reads for him, a lot of the offense. How much will the coaching staff be able to add to his plate, how quickly can he process?”
* * *


“He's a winner, and he’s more accurate than he’s given credit for. I also think he’s more mentally apt than he’s given credit for. Most of all, he’s a leader. He’s played in big games and he’s won in big games, and those are ultimately the things you’re going to fall in love with.
“He’s special off the field. Teammates love playing for him. He’s got face-of-the-franchise qualities.
“He’s probably a little smaller than his school measurements [6' 3", 215 pounds]. He’s tough to tackle and does a great job of avoiding unnecessary hits. He’s got great awareness, he has a smart field IQ. He knows the situation, knows when to run out of bounds or slide, qualities that some guys just don’t have at that level. He’s making a lot of short underneath throws on predetermined reads, but I think the footwork is there. Will need some work but mostly there. When he’s on the run he has excellent vision. He can move defenders with his eyes. As for his arm, he has a quick release and pretty good arm strength. The bottom line is, he can make all of the throws that an NFL quarterback needs to make.”

* * *


“He’s a fiery competitor. He’s going to be a good locker room guy. He’s always looking to be a playmaker when the ball is in his hands. I’d like to see him tone down his renegade play and become more of a pocket passer, but I’m not sure he has the arm strength to do so. To be honest, I don’t think he has the arm to succeed in this league.
“He’s listed at 6' 1", Dede Westbrook is listed at 6-foot. When they stand next to each other, Westbrook looks a clear two inches taller than Baker. Baker is short, he might be 5' 11".
“He wasn’t ready for the league this year. I don’t think he would have been drafted above the fifth round. Returning for his senior season was the right decision.”
* * *


“Right now I’d say he’s a third- to fourth-round guy, who could move to be a second-round guy based off what he does in the Senior Bowl and combine. Everyone is talking about how fast he is, his sub-4.4 speed, even sub-4.3 speed. His numbers from the spring workout were an unofficial 4.43. That’s still pretty freakin’ fast, but not as fast as people think. I love his body control, you watch that touchdown in the Baylor game, where he somehow stayed in bounds, that was one of the most unbelievable touchdowns I’ve seen this year. The average athlete does not stay in bounds.

“You go back to that Oklahoma State game where he got knocked out from a big hit over the middle, that’s concerning because it knocked him out of the game. He’s obviously a competitor, though, because you see the way he fights for extra yards. The stiff arm against West Virginia was awesome. He’s stronger than he looks, he’s quick, he’s fast, he has great hands and is an explosive playmaker. Probably more of a vertical threat than he is a catch-and-run.”
* * *


“He’s probably in the top four of best all-around guys you’ll see this year: It’s Myles Garrett, Jonathan Allen, Leonard Fournette and Jabrill Peppers. There have been a few national scouts who are saying he’s the best guy they’ve seen all year. You’re going to hear a lot of talk about where he should play in the NFL, considering he’s such a versatile athlete, but the word seems to be unanimous that he should be a safety. I don’t see him projecting as a linebacker, he’s a safety to me.
“He can do everything. He can blitz, he can drop back, he can match up against a slot guy in man [coverage]. His closing speed is something. And of course you can use him as a returner.
“He’s special, he has great instincts. He’s not going to fit every scheme for every team but coordinators willing to be creative will be rewarded. I’d love to use him blitzing off the edge. I know the knock on him [that he doesn't have a natural position], but he’s going to produce at the next level. First-round talent.”

* * *

“I played with him for two years. He’s an emotional player, he’s an active player, and he’s tough. He plays when he’s hurt. He’ll give it all. In 2015, my final year playing with him, he stepped onto the scene, but the reason why people didn’t hear about him was that he’d get to the quarterback every time, but he just miss the sacks. I’ve watched every UCLA game this season. Now he’s taking care of the opportunities and closing on the sacks that he missed. Before I left, I told him, ‘You need to get some sacks this season! You’re a top-10 player—you just need to finish out plays to show people that you are.’ He’s balling right now, and I couldn’t be happier for him. He’s going to kill it at the combine because he’s a sick athlete. He’s one of those track-runner guys. Anybody can go hard, but he cares about his team and would do whatever it takes. Those are the types of guys that you look for and he could be a first rounder, no doubt.”
* * *





* * *

(Oregon hired Willie Taggart, an African-American, to fill its football head-coaching vacancy, though Kilgore writes it’s impossible to directly correlate Taggart’s hiring to this bill.)
To me, the article’s most interesting nugget came from a study by Richard Lapchick’s Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport. Lapchick says Charlie Strong joined Tyrone Willingham as the only black coach to get fired from a major college football program and be hired again as a head coach at another. While it’s important to advocate for a fair hiring process and open opportunities for all candidates, it’s equally pertinent to discuss the double standards often harbored in football hiring practices, where white coaches are often granted second chances while black coaches aren’t.

* * *
For the first time in a dozen years, Mount Union won’t be in the NCAA Division III championship game. The Ohio powerhouse was upended in the semifinals by Mary Hardin-Baylor of Texas, which is now 14-0 on the season.
Leading 14-12 with 45 seconds remaining, and facing fourth-and-4 at Mt. Union’s 32, Mary Hardin-Baylor lined up to punt. Instead of kicking, punter Baylor Mullins threw a pass to Trinton Ynclan to secure a first down, and the victory. I’d like to give this genius coaching decision to Mary Hardin-Baylor’s coach, Pete Fredenburg, but turns out it wasn’t his call. Here’s Fredenburg to reporters after the game: “I wish I could take credit for calling that play, but little number 32 [punter Baylor Mullins] made that call. If I would have had the option to call it, I probably wouldn’t have. It was a spur of the moment thing, and it just happened to work out.”
Mullins, for the record, is a two-way player. He’s listed at 5'8", 180 pounds. He began his career as a linebacker before switching to defensive back.
UMHB will face University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh in the championship on Friday.

* * *




GREEN BAY, Wis. — Early in the second half of the Seahawks-Packers tilt on Sunday, Russell Wilson threw a pass into tight coverage, lobbing the ball up for grabs while Jermaine Kearse tried to break away from cornerback LaDarius Gunter in the back of the end zone. “I wasn’t quite sure what was going on,” says Gunter, who felt a sudden thump on his arm—pass deflected. “I see [teammate Quentin Rollins] to my left, and Q grabbing the ball. And all I think is, I hope Q has his feet in.” (He did.)
On Seattle’s next possession, Wilson targeted Doug Baldwin on a crossing route. The ball ricocheted off his face mask and into the air. Cornerback Damarious Randall had slipped on the play but scrambled to make the pick. “Those balls usually hang in the air longer,” says Randall, a 2015 first-rounder out of Arizona State who once played baseball at Butler Community College. “I played centerfield in baseball. I like to think I see the ball in a different way. That’s why they drafted me, because I’m a turnover guy, a playmaking guy. I’m supposed to make plays like this.”
Those two interceptions—those two balls bouncing the right way (finally)—powered Green Bay’s 38-10 victory in the NFC’s most anticipated game on Sunday. And the win, the Packers’ third straight following a four-game skid, pumped more life into their resurgent playoff hopes.
In his nine years as the Packers’ starting quarterback, Aaron Rodgers has made California cool his hallmark. When he preached “r-e-l-a-x” during a 2014 press conference after a 1-2 start, that catchphrase led to nine wins over the next 10 games (and an eventual trip to the NFC title game). And following a 42-24 drubbing at the hands of Washington in Week 11—a fourth-straight loss that dropped the record to 4-6—Rodgers preached patience once again. “I feel like we can run the table,” he told reporters, meaning he believed winning six games to close out the season was a surmountable task.
The Green Bay Packers will are surging in December after a rough start to the season.
Three down, three more to go.
But …
Many questions must still be answered about this 7-6 team that has three NFC North contests to close out the schedule: at Chicago, vs. Minnesota, at Detroit. Chief among those questions: Are the Packers contenders or pretenders?
Rodgers completed 12 of his first 13 passes against the Seahawks, finishing 18-for-23 for 246 yards and three touchdowns. His 150.8 passer rating was the fourth highest of his career and his best since October 2014. But he faced a defense that sorely missed Earl Thomas (broken leg) and picked on in cornerback DeShawn Shead, who was returning from a hamstring issue and often looked as if he were running on a low-speed treadmill.
While Rodgers has now thrown multiple touchdowns for eight straight games, the longest such stretch of his career, there are serious doubts about whether his body can hold up for the late-season push toward the playoffs. He limped around the locker room after the game on Sunday, his balance so wobbly that it was unclear if he was favoring his left hamstring, his right calf, or both. When a team employee greeted Rodgers with a hug and asked how he was feeling, the quarterback said, “I’m hurting man. I’m huuuuurting.”
The Packers will need a newfound running game and their defense to take pressure off their quarterback, but these too are far from sure things.
When Eddie Lacy went on season-ending IR with an ankle injury in late October, the Packers’ resorted to a running-back-by-committee approach. More of the load may start falling on Ty Montgomery, who wears number 88 but often lines up in the backfield. He’s a 6-foot, 216-pound receiver-turned-back who presents as a dual-threat. He ran nine times for 41 yards and scored his first career rushing TD against Seattle; he also caught three passes for 45 yards. In his past two games he has 142 scrimmage yards (7.1 per touch), but he’s never carried the ball more than nine times in a game.
The Packers’ defense intercepted Wilson five times on Sunday, but then again, the Seahawks’ quarterback wasn’t exactly sharp as he turned in a 43.7 rating—the third worst of his career. Some of picks had less to do with great defensive play than poor accuracy and unlucky bounces; which means they don’t negate the fact that the Packers had allowed an NFL worst 8.2 yards per pass attempt entering Sunday’s game. The run defense remained steady—it ranks ninth in yards allowed—but it should be concerning that linebacker Clay Matthews, who is nursing a shoulder injury, has been become a two-down pass rusher.
But one thing is certain: Green Bay has a real shot at winning out against its divisional foes.
The Bears, who host the Packers on Sunday, are 3-10 and have dropped four of their last five. The Lions (9-4) and Vikings (7-6) both won last weekend, but each may have revealed a fatal flaw. Detroit QB Matthew Stafford will finish the season wearing a glove on his throwing hand to protect a dislocated middle finger and torn ligaments; a reeling and undisciplined Minnesota team collected nearly 100 yards of penalties, converted only three of 11 third downs and stalled in the red zone in a 25-16 win over the even more hapless Jaguars.
As it stands now, Green Bay is tied for second in the NFC North with Minnesota (which has lost six of its last eight and travels to Green Bay on Christmas Eve) and two games behind first-place Detroit (which has back-to-back road games against the Cowboys and Giants before facing Green Bay in Week 17.)
For the Packers, the table couldn’t be set any better.
—With reporting by Robert Klemko
This story originally appeared on SI.com.
 


Twenty years before becoming Kansas City Chiefs general manager, in the mid 1990s, John Dorsey was a 30-something scout with the Packers. He often found himself up late, memorizing college players’ 40 times and arm lengths. His boss, Ron Wolf, was demanding but never asked anyone to do something he wouldn’t do himself. Wolf visited colleges’ spring workouts and produced scouting reports. So when Wolf quizzed his department on a player’s numbers, he expected them to be prepared.
“He was willing to teach as much as you were willing to learn,” Dorsey says. “And you know you did well when he’d say, ‘Hey, let’s go for a drive.’ We’d drive to lunch, or just drive around, and that was a moment where it was one-on-one time outside of the office, a unique way for him to find out about us and teach us something at the same time.”
Two decades before he became Raiders GM, Reggie McKenzie was a 30-something pro personnel assistant for the Packers, a former player studying hours of film to get a better understanding of the personnel trade. Wolf often told McKenzie he had a gift. And to show faith, one day Wolf called McKenzie into his office. “He said, ‘Hey, why don’t you call this agent about an undrafted free agent,’” McKenzie recalls. “Now he didn’t ask me to go negotiate a multimillion-dollar deal, but he empowered me to make a football move for us. He then asked my opinion on a minimum-salary guy, then later on bringing in a practice squad player. Ron empowered me, and that experience was invaluable in [becoming] the executive I became today.”
In the mid 1990s, Redskins general manager Scot McCloughan and Seahawks GM John Schneider were 20-something scouts with Green Bay while current Packers general manager Ted Thompson was director of player personnel.
“For many of us, we only know one way of doing it, the Ron Wolf way,” Dorsey says. “Many decisions we make here [with the Chiefs] are rooted in what I learned in Green Bay.”

But equally pertinent are Wolf’s scouting philosophies and draft success. Five current general managers, all with potentially playoff-bound teams (Dorsey, McCloughan, McKenzie, Schneider and Thompson), were groomed under Wolf. And the lessons Wolf preached to his pupils two decades ago are as relevant as ever.
* * *
Wolf’s most notable stamp on modern scouting is his view on quarterbacks: While there’s only room for one starter, you can never acquire too many. In Wolf’s world, it is worthwhile to draft a QB every year, no matter the current roster situation. “Looking now from afar, the best quarterback in the game is a sixth-round draft choice [Tom Brady], and that should alert everybody,” Wolf says. “Then you look at what the Cowboys have accomplished with a fourth-round draft choice. I mean, it tells you what you should do. Those who do not know history are doomed to repeat it.”
Consider that in seven out of eight drafts from 1992 to ’99, Wolf drafted a quarterback, even after Brett Favre was entrenched as the starter. “I learned very early in this game, if you don’t have a quarterback, you don’t have a chance,” Wolf said. “We were very lucky that we had a unique quarterback that never missed a game. But that didn’t stop me from drafting in late rounds. It’s the premiere position, and you better be able to cover yourself.”
In acquiring extra arms—among them Ty Detmer (1992 ninth round), Mark Brunell (’93 fifth round), Matt Hasselbeck (’98 sixth round) and Aaron Brooks (’99 fourth round), all of whom became starters for other teams—Wolf says he was bringing in players to challenge Favre. But more importantly, he was looking for raw talent to cultivate for backup roles, or to dangle for a trade and acquire even more draft picks.

“As long as you have the good coaches willing to take the time to develop, that model can work,” says Dorsey, who has taken QBs in two of his four drafts with the Chiefs.
“You’re not picking a quarterback every year just to stockpile them,” says McKenzie, who drafted Connor Cook in last year’s fourth round even with budding 25-year-old star Derek Carr and 26-year-old backup Matt McGloin already under contract. “But I have to say Ron Wolf's philosophy was most ingrained in me, in the process of picking Conor Cook. Even though we have a starter, and a backup for another year or two, that’s beside the point. If you have a guy ranked high in the draft, and he somehow falls to you, you don’t say, ‘Well, I need a receiver, so I'm going to take a guy that's much lesser ranked [on our draft board] than a quarterback.’ You take the quarterback, especially in the late round, over a need position and hope he gives you some value.
“That’s how important the position is. Ron always taught us to not see what’s right in front of you, but look down the road. That’s what we did with Aaron Brooks and Matt Hasselbeck, and what I did with Connor Cook.”

Which, naturally, brings up this question: How does a team determine who is worth taking a flier on?
“It’s blind luck,” Wolf said. “If I knew how to put together a quarterback, I’d have my own island somewhere.
“People would come to me, show me tape, and we’d discuss this and that. There’s just no question it has always been a difficult position to evaluate. When I was growing up, when the Colts came back to pro football in 1953, there were 12 teams in the league. I’d say seven had quarterbacks, and five didn’t. Now if you look at the 32 teams, maybe half have quarterbacks, and half don’t. Sometimes you don’t know what a guy has in college until you bring him in. Take Hasselbeck—we always thought he had a good arm and he was smart, but once he was in our building we realized we had someone a heck of a lot better than a sixth-round draft choice.”

* * *
Wolf’s other lasting legacy is an insistence on a home-grown roster. Even as he ushered in the free agency era with the seismic Reggie White addition, the Packers famously build their roster through the draft. This has been emphasized under Thompson.
Currently, despite a roster ravaged by injuries, only five players on Green Bay’s two-deep ever appeared in a game with another team (OLB Julius Peppers, DL Letroy Guion, TE Jared Cook, P Jacob Schum and recently signed RB Christine Michael). Last year Press Gazette Media crunched the numbers to find that between 2005 and ’15, Thompson drafted 104 players, and Green Bay led the NFL with 1,860 starts and 3,267 games played from players it had drafted—119 more starts and 106 more games played by such players than any other NFL team. “We discovered early on that it was better to keep your own than get somebody else’s,” Wolf says. “You know truly what you have when you’re playing your own.”



There’s monetary benefit to younger (and therefore cheaper) players. But there’s tremendous value in molding college players—especially significant now as NFL coaches gripe about the growing divide, stylistically, between the college and NFL games. “No question,” Dorsey says, “if you can keep a player in your system, with your coaches, it makes you better off.”
“The whole time I was there we never lost a player [to free agency] we really wanted [to keep], that was really important to me,” Wolf says. “Except for one, because it became a bigger money issue.”
That player? Craig Hentrich, a punter.
“The framework of the game changed dramatically since when I was there, just starting in free agency, and now there are so many avenues open to acquiring players,” Wolf says. “But scouting? In scouting, really nothing has changed.
“Either players can play or they can’t. Either you can evaluate or you can’t. I’d say the access has changed in terms of being able to gather more tape, see film of college players from more angles, but the true principles have remained the same.”

* * *

“He’s a freak athlete. He’s the best athlete I’ve ever seen. But regardless of that, the pro abilities he displays in college are something that take guys in the league years to develop. The vision he has, the way he’s able to set up blocks; he’s an elite player that does stuff NFL running backs do, and in the college game. A lot of times that’s unheard of. He was able to set up linebackers for us. When you think of Christian McCaffrey, you think of the dazzling runs and finesse stuff, but when a linebacker comes, he’s going to pop him. He’s going to stick his head in there and hit. In the Rose Bowl against Iowa, we ran an outside zone play to the left, and a linebacker came and I just literally put a fingertip on the guy, there was no way I was going to get him. But Christian set him up so well, bounced outside and ran for like 80 yards. A lot of running backs would have tried to hit downhill there, but for him to set it up like that, it’s just ridiculous. Unfortunately that play ended up being called back, but it just shows some of the stuff Christian can do. Being able to block for him was one of the highlights of my football career.”

* * *





* * *






LOS ANGELES — The early Sunday slate for Week 8 is in its waning minutes, and the soundtrack for tens of thousands of NFL fans emanates from a dark room in the middle of a nondescript Southern California office park. Andrew Siciliano, in a suit and glossy dress shoes, paces his circular stage, no larger than a college dorm room. He picks at a leafy salad from a styrofoam container as his eyes dart across the wall in front of him: monitors showing all seven live NFL games. This is the DirecTV Red Zone, where there’s no time for nuance and little respect for downs before the 50. In the span of 90 seconds, Siciliano guides viewers through five scenes with a familiar, if dizzying, rhythm.
"After a beautiful play by David Johnson, Carson Palmer and company are now threatening. Two and a half to go, third quarter."
"Now this is Raymond James in the right side of your screen, the Buccaneers, after a 42-yard play to Adam Humphries, they are in the red zone…"
"Carson Palmer second down, incomplete."
"Now Jameis Winston, back of the end zone, that’s Cameron Brate, and that’s a touchdown."
"Nick Foles just connected with Chris Conley for 33 yards, they are now at the Indianapolis 38-yard line; Alex Smith has been ruled out for the rest of the day."
Ten minutes later, action has picked up and Siciliano puts his lunch aside. As seven quarterbacks march on scoring drives, Siciliano consults the two research assistants standing beside him and the producer in a faraway room. "Hey Bill, what’s happening on [screen] one?" Siciliano asks off-air, looking at the Patriots-Bills tilt. "Get ready for one."
"No, wait," the host interjects, directing his attention to screen six: Detroit at Houston, where the Lions are about to kick a field goal. "Let’s show six." He takes three steps to the left and takes a look at the Buccaneers game on screen four. "Or wait, four! There’s a two-point conversion!" Siciliano shouts. "Can we show four? Four, four, four!"
The feed can’t switch fast enough. The director already has cut to screen six, Houston. Siciliano stomps his foot and mouths "Dammit!" They didn’t show the more exciting play live. No time for regrets, though: Siciliano jumps back into the flow to narrate Matt Prater’s 34-yard field goal and then a quick replay of the Tampa Bay conversion.
"Let’s go here, this is Houston, this is a field goal to make it a one-score game. That field goal is good, so it’s 20-13. But the Buccaneers just got a two-point conversion to extend the lead to seven. Mike Evans there from Jameis Winston and we will go to Carolina…."
Off air again, Siciliano lets out an exaggerated sigh. "That was my bad," he says. He glances across the spread of screens and fixes on Colts-Chiefs, which is coming back from commercial. "Wait, is that a monkey?" Siciliano asks. "Can somebody find out if that’s a monkey on the screen?" And now he has another decision to make.
DirecTV’s Red Zone has been a prominent Sunday player since its debut in 2005. This week marks the show’s 200th episode. It is important to note that there are two nearly identical channels — the other, NFL Network’s RedZone, hosted by Scott Hanson — that offer live whip-around coverage of Sunday football. Though Chris Long, executive producer of DirecTV’s version, insists the shows are distinguished by personality (as well as whether or not there’s a space between words in the show title), the truth is that a viewer doesn’t get to choose between Hanson and Siciliano; it depends on what provider you subscribe to. Siciliano’s show is only available through DirecTV’s Sunday Ticket package; Hanson’s show is carried on cable as well as Dish TV and some smartphones.
"If you juxtapose them next to each other, they are different broadcasts, there’s a different flavor," Long says. "It does seem odd that there are two channels offering the same thing, and who knows — one day down the road we can affect change and combine them."
The continuous action at breakneck speed (no commercials, no airing of punts) caters to America’s collectively shrinking attention span. As 2016 launched the debate on the future of NFL broadcast consumption — with a sharp decrease in television viewers over the season’s first half — it is notable that Long says Red Zone is as healthy as ever. In fact, though DirecTV does not report its viewership numbers, Long says there has been "an uptick" this season. (There also has been an uptick in DirecTV’s fantasy-centric programming, Long says).

This can be framed in two ways: Either Red Zone was progressive in its launch a decade ago, foreseeing how fans wanted to watch football, or it has itself been an agent of change, eroding the viewer’s willingness to sit passively through those three-hour single-game blocks.
"I don’t know if we deserve credit or blame for how viewing habits are evolving," Siciliano says. "We did not invent the cell phone, we did not invent social media or fantasy football, or many of the things that distract us now from sitting down and watching a full game. We’re certainly not the reason America has no attention span, but I know we haven’t helped the problem. We’ve probably helped make it worse.
"Nobody has any patience anymore when a game slows down. They demand immediate action. If the game they’re watching is boring, they want to find a better one. We were the show to give them that, where they didn’t actually have to bother to pick up the remote.
"Look, those six and a half hours of NFL football on Sundays make for the most entertaining reality show on TV, and we want people to hand over the controls so we can highlight the best of it."
Siciliano, 42, has a cult following stemming in part from the show’s mystique. He begins each Sunday with a live shot from a desk (hence the suit), then vanishes for six-plus hours, becoming Oz behind a veil of screens.
In its inaugural season, Siciliano didn’t appear on camera at all. The show filmed in a much smaller studio with a green screen at FOX, and it had access to only FOX-broadcast games. "We needed to have Andrew show his face, if only for the beginning," Long says. "To establish that this is a real, produced sports show."
Siciliano’s setup now includes a desk just big enough to hold his laptop and a cup of coffee. The computer is booted up with exactly two screens: Siciliano’s Gmail account, and TweetDeck, which he constantly scans through the broadcast.
"We used to have a chair for him," says James Crittenden, another executive producer, "but we ended up taking it away, probably after a half a season, because he never used it."
Instead, Siciliano paces, squats, jumps and occasionally pumps his fist. At one point, as refs huddle to determine a contested catch, Siciliano acts out the play himself, demonstrating both feet touching the ground. His unwavering enthusiasm radiates on the broadcast, but his constant movement raises the question of why, since he doesn’t appear on air after the opening setup, he doesn’t change into more comfortable clothing — or at the very least, running shoes. "That’s a good point, especially because I have a bad back," Siciliano says. He adds that he does have "good insoles."
It is his voice — engaging, confident — that carries the show. One week earlier Siciliano battled a viral emergency. Over the course of the broadcast his voice began shriveling, to the point that he received a flurry of tweets from viewers wondering if he had taken a day off. "Even friends, good friends of mine, were reaching out, asking if it was really me," Siciliano says. "They turned on the TV and thought it was a hoax, that I wasn’t really there." The following day he went straight to the doctor for an emergency steroid shot — but he didn’t help his own case when on Tuesday he flew to Cleveland to watch his beloved Indians in Game 1 of the World Series.
This brings us to Siciliano’s most notable quirk: his bathroom schedule (or rather, lack thereof). In short, he rarely takes a break during a broadcast. "I admittedly play it up a little bit," Siciliano says. "But it’s real." When he arrives each Sunday at 7:30 a.m. local time, after downing a five-shot venti Americano, Siciliano records a series of transitions — "Meanwhile, we take you to Green Bay…" … "Here we are, at Raymond James Stadium…" — that the director can use in the event that the host is, ahem, indisposed at some point during the show. It is a two-and-a-half minute exercise in futility; no one on the crew can remember the last time they had to deploy the prerecorded Siciliano. He has taken bathroom breaks, but they are rare, even as he drinks five more cups of coffee throughout the day. "The day I lost my voice, it was undeniable," he says. "I had to drink so much water and tea."
Despite the frenetic energy, the beauty of Red Zone is its familiarity. Since wholesale changes in Season 2 — notably the inclusion of all broadcast games in the 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. windows, not just FOX — not much has been altered. Siciliano integrates social media, both for information and to interact with fans, and graphics have been updated, but the show is otherwise nearly identical to its iteration a decade ago. "We feel like we hit jackpot," Long says. "If it hasn’t changed in 10 years, I don’t think it would change 10 years from now."
Siciliano does have a few ideas, though. "Not that I want to put myself out of a job, but I do think there will be some element where the viewer is connected and can have more control of what they’re watching," he says. "Additionally, there will be an element of virtual reality. When I say, ‘Let’s go to AT&T Stadium, to see Dak Prescott here in his 10th season with the Cowboys,’ all of the sudden your room will get brighter and you’ll hear the sounds and feel like you’re standing on the sideline in Dallas."
 
My goal is to go the entire season, Week 1 through 17, without peeing [during the broadcast]. I’ve never done that. I’ve gone a 17-week stretch over two seasons, but that feels cheap, like how they allowed Benito Santiago to carry his rookie hitting streak into his second season.
Andrew Siciliano
For now there is the Red Zone as we know it, and as Siciliano curates it. The machine is well-oiled. There is the crew member in the control room who listens to the feeds of broadcasts, waiting to pluck pertinent information, and the team that builds graphics for Siciliano to recite on air. There are the two researchers, Jayson Thibault and Daniel Burris, who stand by Siciliano’s side, fielding frantic inquiries such as "How many field goals has Aguayo missed this year?" and "Who is No. 37 on white?" by scribbling answers on a piece of notebook paper and waving them in Siciliano’s face. Much of the staff has been here as long as the host. On weekdays they scatter to their "day jobs" — many work production for The Rich Eisen Show or The Dan Patrick Show. Siciliano is a host on NFL Network, where he is, ironically, colleagues with Hanson. (The two have known each other since they were students at Syracuse; Siciliano says they have a good relationship but that, given his schedule, he has never seen Hanson’s RedZone show. "I’m sure they do a good job," he says.)
But now, back to that monkey. "Do we know what’s going on here?" Siciliano asks into his headset. It is determined that it is a live shot from the Indianapolis Zoo, and as a change of pace from the football action Siciliano decides they will show footage of the primate. "They just showed this, on the Indianapolis broadcast, that’s a monkey at the Indianapolis Zoo," he narrates. "No monkeys riding dogs, but now we have this monkey. Thank you, thank you. Trying my best to entertain."
A few minutes later Siciliano checks Twitter, where a viewer has provided a correction.
"OK," Siciliano says. "Apparently that was an ape. Now back to what you came here for."
This article originally appeared on the MMQB.


LOS ANGELES — The early Sunday slate for Week 8 is in its waning minutes, and the soundtrack for tens of thousands of NFL fans emanates from a dark room in the middle of a non-descript Southern California office park. Andrew Siciliano, in a suit and glossy dress shoes, paces his circular stage, no larger than a college dorm room. He picks at a leafy salad from a styrofoam container as his eyes dart across the wall in front of him: monitors showing all seven live NFL games. This is the DirectTV Red Zone, where there’s no time for nuance and little respect for downs before the 50. In the span of 90 seconds, Siciliano guides viewers through five scenes with a familiar, if dizzying, rhythm.
“After a beautiful play by David Johnson, Carson Palmer and company are now threatening. Two and a half to go, third quarter.”
“Now this is Raymond James in the right side of your screen, the Buccaneers, after a 42-yard play to Adam Humphries, they are in the red zone…”
“Carson Palmer second down, incomplete.”
“Now Jameis Winston, back of the end zone, that’s Cameron Brate, and that’s a touchdown.”
“Nick Foles just connected with Chris Conley for 33 yards, they are now at the Indianapolis 38 yard line; Alex Smith has been ruled out for the rest of the day.”
Ten minutes later, action has picked up and Siciliano puts his lunch aside. As seven quarterbacks march on scoring drives, Siciliano consults the two research assistants standing beside him and the producer in a faraway room. “Hey Bill, what’s happening on [screen] one?” Siciliano asks off-air, looking at the Patriots-Bills tilt. “Get ready for one.”
“No, wait,” the host interjects, directing his attention to screen six: Detroit at Houston, where the Lions are about to kick a field goal. “Let’s show six.” He takes three steps to the left and takes a look at the Buccaneers game on screen four. “Or wait, four! There’s a two point conversion!” Siciliano shouts. “Can we show four? Four, four, four!”
The feed can’t switch fast enough. The director has already cut to screen six, Houston. Siciliano stomps his foot and mouths “dammit!” They didn’t show the more exciting play live. No time for regrets, though: Siciliano jumps back into the flow to narrate Matt Prater’s 34-yard field goal and then a quick replay of the Tampa Bay conversion.
“Let’s go here, this is Houston, this is a field goal to make it a one-score game. That field goal is good, so it’s 20-13. But the Buccaneers just got a two-point conversion to extend the lead to seven. Mike Evans there from Jameis Winston and we will go to Carolina….”
Off air again, Siciliano lets out an exaggerated sigh. “That was my bad,” he says. He glances across the spread of screens and fixes on Colts-Chiefs, which is coming back from commercial. “Wait, is that a monkey?” Siciliano asks. “Can somebody find out if that’s a monkey on the screen?” And now he has another decision to make.
* * *
DirecTV’s Red Zone has been a prominent Sunday player since its debut in 2005. This week marks the show’s 200th episode. It is important to note that there are two nearly identical channels—the other, NFL Network’s RedZone, hosted by Scott Hanson—that offer live whip-around coverage of Sunday football. Though Chris Long, executive producer of DirecTV’s version, insists the shows are distinguished by personality (as well as whether or not there’s a space between words in the show title), the truth is that a viewer doesn’t get to choose between Hanson and Siciliano; it depends on what provider you subscribe to. Siciliano’s show is only available through DirecTV’s Sunday Ticket package; Hanson’s show is carried on cable as well as Dish TV and some smartphones.
“I think if you juxtapose them next to each other, they are different broadcasts, there’s a different flavor,” Long says. “It does seem odd that there are two channels offering the same thing, and who knows—one day down the road we can effect change and combine them.”
The continuous action at breakneck speed (no commercials, no airing of punts) caters to America’s collectively shrinking attention span. As 2016 launched the debate on the future of NFL broadcast consumption—with a sharp decrease in television viewers over the season’s first half—it is notable that Red Zone, Long says, is as healthy as ever. In fact, though DirectTV does not report its viewership numbers, Long says there has been “an uptick” this season. (There has also been an uptick in DirecTV’s fantasy-centric programming, Long says).
“I don’t know if we deserve credit or blame for how viewing habits are evolving. Nobody has patience anymore when a game slows down.”
This can be framed in two ways: Either Red Zone was progressive in its launch a decade ago, foreseeing how fans wanted to watch football, or it has itself been an agent of change, eroding the viewer’s willingness to sit passively through those three-hour single-game blocks.
“I don’t know if we deserve credit or blame for how viewing habits are evolving,” Siciliano says. “We did not invent the cell phone, we did not invent social media or fantasy football, or many of the things that distract us now from sitting down and watching a full game. We’re certainly not the reason America has no attention span, but I know we haven't helped the problem. We've probably helped make it worse.
“Nobody has any patience anymore when a game slows down. They demand immediate action. If the game they're watching is boring, they want to find a better one. We were the show to give them that, where they didn't actually have to bother to pick up the remote. Look, those six and a half hours of NFL football on Sundays make for the most entertaining reality show on TV, and we want people to hand over the controls so we can highlight the best of it.”
* * *
Siciliano, 42, has a cult following stemming in part from the show’s mystique. He begins each Sunday with a live shot from a desk (hence the suit) then vanishes for six-plus hours, becoming Oz behind a veil of screens.
In its inaugural season, Siciliano didn’t appear on camera at all. The show filmed in a much smaller studio with a green screen at Fox, and it only had access to Fox-broadcast games. “We needed to have Andrew show his face, if only for the beginning,” Long says. “To establish that this is a real, produced sports show.”
Siciliano’s setup now includes a desk just big enough to hold his laptop and a cup of coffee. The computer is booted up with exactly two screens: Siciliano’s Gmail account, and TweetDeck, which he constantly scans through the broadcast.
“We used to have a chair for him,” says James Crittenden, another executive producer, “But we ended up taking it away, probably after a half a season, because he never used it.”
Instead, Siciliano paces, squats, jumps and occasionally pumps his fist. At one point, as refs huddle to determined a contested catch, Siciliano acts out the play himself, demonstrating both feet touching the ground. His unwavering enthusiasm radiates on the broadcast, but his constant movement raises the question of why, since he doesn’t appear on air after the opening setup, he doesn’t change into more comfortable clothing—or at the very least, running shoes. “That’s a good point, especially because I have a bad back,” Siciliano says. He adds that he does have “good insoles.
It is his voice—engaging, confident—that carries the show. One week earlier Siciliano battled a viral emergency. Over the course of the broadcast his voice began shriveling, to the point that he received a flurry of tweets from viewers wondering if he had taken a day off. “Even friends, good friends of mine, were reaching out, asking if it was really me,” Siciliano says. “They turned on the TV and thought it was a hoax, that I wasn’t really there.” The following day he went straight to the doctor for an emergency steroid shot—but he didn’t help his own case when on Tuesday he flew to Cleveland to watch his beloved Indians in Game 1 of the World Series.
“My goal is to go the entire season, Week 1 through 17, without peeing.”
This brings us to Siciliano’s most notable quirk: his bathroom schedule (or rather, lack thereof). In short, he rarely takes a break during a broadcast. “I admittedly play it up a little bit,” Siciliano says. “But it’s real.” When he arrives each Sunday at 7:30 a.m. local time, after downing a five-shot venti Americano, Siciliano records a series of transitions—“Meanwhile, we take you to Green Bay…” “Here we are, at Raymond James Stadium…”—that the director can use in the event that the host is, ahem, indisposed at some point during the show. It is a two-and-a-half minute exercise in futility; no one on the crew can remember the last time they had to deploy the prerecorded Siciliano. He has taken bathroom breaks, but they are rare, even as he drinks five more cups of coffee throughout the day. “The day I lost my voice, it was undeniable,” he says. “I had to drink so much water and tea. My goal is to go the entire season, Week 1 through 17, without peeing [during the broadcast]. I’ve never done that. I’ve gone a 17-week stretch over two seasons, but that feels cheap, like how they allowed Benito Santiago to carry his rookie hitting streak into his second season.”
* * *
Despite the frenetic energy, the beauty of Red Zone is its familiarity. Since wholesale changes in Season 2—notably the inclusion of all broadcast games in the 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. windows, not just Fox—not much has been altered. Siciliano integrates social media, both for information and to interact with fans, and graphics have been updated, but the show is otherwise nearly identical to its iteration a decade ago. “We feel like we hit jackpot,” Long says. “If it hasn’t changed in 10 years, I don’t think it would change 10 years from now.”
Siciliano does have a few ideas, though. “Not that I want to put myself out of a job, but I do think there will be some element where the viewer is connected and can have more control of what they’re watching,” he says. “Additionally, there will be an element of virtual reality. When I say, ‘Let’s go to AT&T Stadium, to see Dak Prescott here in his 10th season with the Cowboys,’ all of the sudden your room will get brighter and you’ll hear the sounds and feel like you’re standing on the sideline in Dallas.”
For now there is the Red Zone as we know it, and as Siciliano curates it. The machine is well-oiled. There is the crew member in the control room who listens to the feeds of broadcasts, waiting to pluck pertinent information, and the team that builds graphics for Siciliano to recite on air. There are the two researchers, Jayson Thibault and Daniel Burris, who stand by Siciliano’s side, fielding frantic inquiries such as “How many field goals has Aguayo missed this year?” and “Who is No. 37 on white?” by scribbling answers on a piece of notebook paper and waving them in Siciliano’s face. Much of the staff has been here as long as the host. On weekdays they scatter to their “day jobs”—many work production for The Rich Eisen Show or The Dan Patrick Show. Siciliano is a host on NFL Network, where he is, ironically, colleagues with Hanson. (The two have known each other since they were students at Syracuse; Siciliano says they have a good relationship but that, given his schedule, he has never seen Hanson’s RedZone show. “I’m sure they do a good job,” he says.)
But now, back to that monkey. “Do we know what’s going on here?” Siciliano asks into his headset. It is determined that it is a live shot from the Indianapolis Zoo, and as a change of pace from the football action Siciliano decides they will show footage of the primate. “They just showed this, on the Indianapolis broadcast, that’s a monkey at the Indianapolis Zoo,” he narrates. “No monkeys riding dogs, but now we have this monkey. Thank you, thank you. Trying my best to entertain.”
A few minutes later Siciliano checks Twitter, where a viewer has provided a correction.
“OK,” Siciliano says. “Apparently that was an ape. Now back to what you came here for.”


DETROIT — It’s 4 p.m. on an autumn Friday, and that means one thing for Kerry Hyder: time to take a trip down under.
Hyder pulls into the parking lot of an Outback Steakhouse, the Aussie-theme chain known for its campy commercials and 800-calorie fried onion. His wife, Jasmine, has their sleeping 2-year-old daughter, Giavonna, pinned at her hip as the family struts into the restaurant an hour before the early-bird crowd. They make their way to a corner booth unrecognized and, with no delay, put in their order for a Bloomin’ Onion.
Hyder stretches his arms along the stiff upholstered booth bench and grins. “This,” he says. “Is the best part of my week.”
If you’re not a Lions fan, or if your favorite team hasn’t taken on Detroit yet, you might not be familiar with Hyder. Undrafted as a 300-pound defensive tackle out of Texas Tech in 2014, he spent his first two NFL seasons stashed on practice squads (the Jets in ’14, the Lions in ’15). This season, with star linemate Ziggy Ansah limited by injuries, Hyder has carried the pass rush for the NFC North-leading Lions. His seven sacks through nine games rank fourth in the NFC.
Hyder’s ascent is a classic underdog tale of resolute focus and sacrifice. At the conclusion of last season, Lions management told him the team planned on signing multiple defensive linemen in free agency. He read between the lines and began mulling his options; perhaps he would become a gym teacher, or a coach. “I don’t have the luxury a lot of guys have of just waiting around and waiting for something to happen,” Hyder says. “I have a wife and a child to provide for, I needed to get a salary for them, whether it was in the NFL or outside the NFL.”
As a last-ditch attempt to salvage his football career, Hyder accepted the coaches’ invitation to switch to defensive end. He bundled up in sweatsuits and labored through daily one-hour elliptical sessions before normal workouts. He cut out sugar, pork, and fried food and shed 35 pounds, down to 265.
“I made my goal of making a 53-man roster,” Hyder says. “But I can’t let up now. I needed to make new goals, I needed to stay in the NFL.”
So Hyder maintains a regimented lifestyle, complete with meal prep and daily weigh-ins. But on Friday evenings, he allows himself a cheat meal. He always takes Jasmine and Giavonna to Outback.
“And here it is,” Jasmine says, as the waitress places the fried onion bouquet on the table. Hyder lets Jasmine dig in first. Then he grabs his first piece, takes a bite and licks his fingers.

* * *
Hyder grew up in Austin, Texas and played running back until high school. He broke his leg his sophomore year. “My mom was really concerned about me,” he says. “So she comforted me with food.”
As Hyder substituted a season of football with couch time and heaping plates of homemade indulgences, he gained close to 30 pounds, ballooning to 245. When he returned his junior year, coaches moved him to the defensive line.
Only 6' 2" and new at the position, top Division 1 offers were scant. Hyder, who lived across the street from the University of Texas, long wanted to be a Longhorn. Instead, he settled on Texas Tech when Mike Leach offered him a scholarship-on-the-spot. Twice a second-team All-Big 12 selection, Hyder earned an invite to the NFL combine. “I didn’t get the 40 time I wanted,” he says. “But I thought I did O.K. otherwise.” The larger issue: Teams didn’t like Hyder’s body composition; he was a tweener.
Hyder weighted 290 pounds. At Tech, he never worried about eating habits; his play was strong, even if he had a bulge. Little Caesars was a staple. Sometimes meals consisted of only Muscle Milk.
“I remember in draft interviews, all teams kept asking was, ‘What position do you play?’” Hyder says. “‘Are you an inside guy or an outside guy?’ I’d just say, ‘I play defensive line.’” But that answer didn’t suffice. Says one area scout who evaluated Hyder at Texas Tech: “I liked his effort but he carried too much weight, especially in his lower half, and that’s not ideal for an NFL-caliber tackle.”
Hyder had only one team visit, with the Cowboys. He signed with the Jets hours after the draft. After spending all of 2014 on the practice squad, Hyder felt he was improving. “Maybe I had a chance to make the team the next season,” Hyder says. “Then the last day of the season, Rex [Ryan] and the whole staff was fired. I knew they were going to clean house, and that meant me too.”
* * *

* * *
Hyder signed with the Lions in January 2015, again optimistic. “[Ndamukong] Suh had left, Nick Fairley had left, C.J. Mosley was gone,” he says. “I felt like I was coming in at a great position. I had three fumble recoveries in the last preseason game.”
But Hyder was once again relegated to practice squad. “I was upset but it still felt O.K. because it seemed like it would only be for a couple weeks,” Hyder says. “I knew I was going to get called up eventually.”
Weeks passed, the Lions struggled, and Hyder didn’t get the call. Between September and October, Detroit signed four other defensive tackles. Hyder kept fighting. Wednesdays were the last day the team put on shoulder pads for the week, so Hyder treated those days as game days. He would get eight hours of sleep Tuesday nights. He would ask trainers to wrap his tape extra tight.
“You look out there and see 61, that’s not always a defensive end number,” Aaron Rodgers said. “He must have a great work ethic and a lot of confidence because he’s really made himself into a solid player.”


“I’d say, ‘We have to take a look at this guy,’ because every single week he finds his way into the backfield,” coach Jim Caldwell said earlier this year. “He was creating problems for us in practice. He just has this knack in terms of pass rush.” And yet, the Lions didn’t call on Hyder until the season finale. He was on the field for two plays.
Meanwhile, practice squad life was a strain on the Hyders. Jasmine, a four-time All-America hurdler at Arizona State, stayed in Texas to train for the 2016 Olympics. Hyder’s parents—his mother is a beautician and his father is a mechanic—helped care for Giavonna. Hyder estimates that by the end of the year, his practice squad salary, after taxes, was about $60,000. Though he had a roommate in Detroit (defensive end Brandon Copeland), maintaining residences in two states, plus airfare for frequent trips from Texas to Detroit, added up. (Consider: Hyder was fined $18,000 this preseason for roughing Bengals quarterback AJ McCarron. He earned roughly $1,000 per week in training camp).
Without his family, Hyder’s life and eating habits revolved around practice. For breakfast, he’d eat at the facility: eggs, toast, orange juice, bacon and sausage. He’d have a post-workout shake, then for lunch have pasta. Dinner again was at the facility. “The food was never that unhealthy,” Hyder says. “But they have these big plates so you’re never really managing your portions. If Jasmine was in town maybe I’d eat at home but she wasn’t living with me.”
And then there was a second dinner. “I stayed right across the street from a Chipotle,” he says. “And the closet things to me were a TGI Friday’s, WingStop and a Chinese takeout place.” Most of those establishments knew Hyder by name.

* * *
When Hyder returned to Austin in January, he committed to losing weight. Jasmine had been conscious of her food in-take since college; her track coach at Arizona State was also a nutrition coach. She detailed a meal plan for her husband. “I was eating pretty much only fish and chicken,” he says. “No fried foods. Salads all the time—but without croutons or dressing. Only lemon juice. I’m telling you, if you put enough lemon on there, it doesn’t taste so bad.”
He worked out at a gym in Austin that had no air conditioning. He’d arrive an hour early for the cardio—“in the heat of Texas spring, mind you”—then do a full lift and position drills workout. Though he was torching calories, Jasmine was concerned he wouldn’t keep the weight off until he ate smarter. “He’d come home then not eat for two or three hours!” Jasmine says. “You need to get your protein in so you can recover.” Soon, Jasmine was waking up earlier too—to stuff tuna packets in Hyder’s backpack. As the weight melted, Hyder’s confidence swelled. In his final preseason game, against Buffalo, Hyder racked up three sacks.
They Hyders decided that Jasmine—who missed out on the Olympic team—and Giavonna would move to Detroit if Hyder made the team. By September, the family had taken over Jeremy Kerley’s lease (after the receiver was traded to San Francisco). The family had some security.
Hyder’s first sack of the year came in the season-opener at Indianapolis, in the middle of the Colts’ opening drive. He lined up at left end opposite Joe Reitz. “I was trying to run off as hard as I could,” Hyder says. “I got chipped by the running back [Frank Gore], and the tackle must have been caught off guard because I beat him inside. Then all of the sudden it’s just me and Andrew Luck.” Hyder swarmed in for his first-career sack. He notched his second in the second quarter.
He returned to the locker room after the game to dozens of texts from college friends, chiding him for not properly celebrating. “I hadn’t really prepared anything,” Hyder says. “So they suggested I do the Southside [dance] after sacks.” No worries, Hyder had a sack in each of the next three games, and preformed the Southside after each one.
* * *
When the Lions offered Hyder’s college jersey number, 91, to second-round draft pick A’Shawn Robinson, Hyder decided he would keep No. 61. “That’s the number I wore on the practice squad,” he says. “And if it was good enough for me then, it is good enough for me now.”
“You look out there and see 61, that’s not always a defensive end number,” Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers said upon scouting Hyder’s tape before their Week 3 matchup. “I can’t think of another guy wearing that number, but a high-effort player, he’s making a lot of plays… Obviously, he never became a victim of his circumstances. He definitely must have a great work ethic and a lot of confidence because he’s really made himself into a solid player.” Three days after Rodgers gushed that praise, Hyder sacked him.
The early-season surge was welcome for a defense line undergoing a makeover under first-year general manager Bob Quinn, especially as defensive end Ziggy Ansah missed four games with an ankle injury. When the Pro Bowler returned in Week 6, Lions coaches figured out ways to keep Hyder on the field, including a move back inside as a situational pass-rusher.
Hyder has finally come around to buying new clothes. His old underwear is too big. On the first road trip, he wore a suit he had bought his rookie year and was embarrassed by how baggy it looked on television. “I got it altered, and they took four inches off,” he says. “They said they probably could have done more, but my pants would have been crooked.”
Now at 265 pounds, he is in maintenance mode. Jasmine says he can have two cheat meals per week—one on Monday nights before his Tuesday off day—though Hyder rarely cashes in. And after he plucks at seven bites of the Bloomin’ Onion, Hyder returns to his new comfort zone. The loaf of bread remains untouched. He sips on water and orders the relatively diet-friendly 22-ounce ribeye with sides of sweet potato and mixed vegetables.
He licks his fingers after finishing off that, too.


LOS ANGELES — College coaches often warn players to ignore NFL scouts attending practices. USC right tackle Zach Banner knows this; after all, it’s his fifth year in the program. And yet Banner can’t help but sneak a glance anytime a man with an NFL team logo stands on the sideline. According to Banner, scouts often look directly at him, jot notes, then converse with one Trojans coach in particular, Ivan Lewis.
“The strength and conditioning coach,” he says. “You know why? Because he’s the one who weighs me in every day.”
Banner boasts striking pro credentials. He is 6-foot-9, with the naturally wide base and impressive wingspan to ward defenders in pass protection. He is a three-year starter and described by coach Clay Helton as “a consummate leader… Sometimes at halftime I go into my little office to make adjustments. And I can’t think because all I hear is Zach’s bellowing voice through the hall trying to pump his teammates up.”
Banner has no known off-field concerns. He even has an NFL pedigree: His biological father is Lincoln Kennedy, a top-10 pick in 1993 and a stalwart on the offensive line for Jon Gruden’s Raiders, making three Pro Bowls (2000-02) as a right tackle. But even in a thin offensive line class, there’s one concern keeping evaluators from labeling Banner a surefire first-rounder. He is the largest player in college football.
“My weight, it’s always been about my weight,” Banner says. “That’s really the reason why I didn’t declare for the draft last year. I came back because I had to prove to NFL teams that I could lose weight, and also keep it off.”
When considering the modern lineman, we think of girth and power. The average quarterback’s size has grown steadily over time (perhaps peaking at Cam Newton), and so too has the size of the men asked to shore up the trenches around him. The average offensive lineman swelled from 6-foot-3, 255 pounds in the 1970s to 6-foot-4, 300 pounds in the 1990s to last year’s average: 6-foot-5, 312 pounds.


* * *
Growing up in Lakewood, Wash., 15 minutes south of Tacoma, Banner was always much bigger than his peers. He reached 5-feet by second grade. He became a spectacle.
There was a third-grade teacher who asked if Vanessa Banner if her son had a problem with authority, prompting a conference in which Vanessa said: “I understand it’s hard, as a petite woman, to have your grade-school student stand and look you eye-to-eye, but I promise he’s a good student.”
And Banner was a good student, as well as naturally charismatic and popular with classmates. (According to Helton, Banner “wants to be the next Michael Strahan TV personality.”) Banner created his own web series while at USC, “Big Man Doing Little Things,” and when the school hosted a retirement party for athletic director Pat Haden, Banner was asked to emcee.)
Weight was never an issue until Banner reached college. He complemented football with basketball throughout high school, which helped him stay active. (As a freshman in 2012, he was on the Trojans roster for both basketball and football.) But in 2013, Banner underwent hip impingement surgery on both legs, sidelining him for an entire season and forcing him to specialize in football-only rehab. The downtime didn’t serve him well. His freshman 15 swelled to a sophomore 65, fortified by fast food snacks and late-night binges. He had arrived on campus around 305-310 pounds, but was suddenly tipping the scales above 380. In the middle of last season, when he heard rumblings of poor feedback from NFL scouts, he committed to wholesale change. “I was so close to my dream of playing in the NFL, but there was one thing preventing me from getting there,” he says. “But it was one thing I can control.”

* * *
Banner wakes up at each weekday at 4:30 a.m., grabs a Nutri-Grain Bar, then reports to the facility for 40 minutes of extra cardio before the team arrives for its scheduled lift. (Over the summer he bought an LA Fitness membership so he could use the elliptical after the team weight room closed.) Banner, who has always lived with teammates, moved into a solo apartment this season in part to limit distractions—but mainly, so that he could live a life of bare cabinets. “I was with linemen and running backs and they just ate like crap or ate whenever they wanted,” Banner says. Andrea Vanderwoude, the team’s nutritionist, estimates more than half the team is trying to maintain or gain weight during the season: some lean wide receivers or defensive backs have such high metabolisms, she prescribes 7,000-calorie-a-day diets. Banner reached his goal of 345 when he reported to camp this summer, and to maintain it, Vanderwoude recommends 3,000-3,500 calories for the lineman. His weight still fluctuates; Banner says he can lose or gain between five and 10 pounds each day.
“For some guys, no matter what, it can be a struggle,” Vanderwoude says, “and for Zach it was always a struggle. He wants to lose the weight, but he also has to be smart about it. When you take away calories, you increase risk of injury, because you’re taking away recovery pieces when your body is in a state of break down.”
Vanderwoude’s meal plan includes three meals and two snacks a day—and if he’s hungry late at night, a protein shake. It involves whole foods and balanced nutrients. “I learned avocado, kale and quinoa are not so bad,” says Banner, who before our interview proudly reports he just ate a Poke bowl.
Banner’s mother is from Guam, where food is a big part of culture, and when he visits home restraint is difficult. But when Banner told his family about his goals, they decided to get onboard. He printed out a meal plan for his brother, a high school senior who plays outside linebacker, and offered his mother recipes featuring quinoa. “We’re pretty competitive so we’ve all accepted the challenge,” Vanessa says. “His sister is always texting him, I’m going to lose my next 10 pounds faster than you.”
Over the past year, Vanessa says she has lost 45 pounds; her middle son has lost about 10 pounds and her daughter, who is 13 and a competitive soccer goalie, lost about 30 pounds. “It’s amazing how he has inspired all of us,” Vanessa says.
While Banner believes weight is the biggest question mark surrounding his draft stock, scouts have expressed concern about his footwork. He sustained a left ankle sprain on the final play of the Utah game on Sept. 23, which forced him to miss two games. Scouts say Banner flashes moments of great technique, but also needs improvement in certain areas. Banner has been through five offensive line coaches in his five seasons, and his current teacher, Neil Callaway, offers this assessment: “He’s a big man, and sometimes things are a little difficult for big guys, with leverage, bending knees. I think he’s improved with a lot of the little things, like being off sides, taking the wrong step, and putting your hand in the right place, but he still is working at it.”
There are plenty rooting for Banner to succeed. “My dad was an offensive line coach in the NFL for 13 years,” Helton says. “And I think he’s Zach’s biggest fan.”

* * *

“He’s a player who’s always going to fight until the whistle. He’s quiet, like me, but a competitor. He loves the game and the way he plays shows it. The game I’ll always remember was against Nebraska. That was such a huge game for our program, and when pressure was the highest, Dawuane came through with a sack of Tommy Armstrong. His technique is great and I can see him being an explosive end in the NFL. I don’t think he’s ever played three-technique. With his speed, his power, all of that… look, there’s a lot of guys who have talent, but what separates someone like Dawuane is his effort and that’s why he’s going to be a beast at the next level.”
* * *
Trent Richardson had a busy week. The former Alabama star running back, and No. 3 pick of the 2012 draft, reportedly had a tryout with the Chiefs. He also, according to reports, made a cameo at Crimson Tide practice. Actually, it was more than just a cameo: Richardson practiced on the scout team, playing the role of Leonard Fournette (an unusual allowance in the otherwise stringent NCAA rulebook). Richardson must have offered the first-team defense solid looks: Fournette was limited to 35 yards on 17 carries as Alabama won, 10-0.

* * *





* * *




* * *

It’s just the latest example of a coach getting literal with his symbolism. With a nod to the guys at Pardon My Take for tipping me off to this, two weeks ago Penn State coach James Franklin handed every player a juice box on the Friday before its game against Purdue, a reminder to “bring the juice” on the road.
Apparently there’s some truth to the adage about visualization: Both South Carolina and Penn State won their next games.




* * *
USC's campus is absurdly attractive: manicured lawns, palm trees, outdoor fire pits and cabanas. It almost feels like you're at a resort. The only thing I’m not a fan of is the gated aspect, especially when it’s past dusk and I’m on the phone with the editor of this column, Gary Gramling, logging a bulk of my 10,000 steps just to find an exit. Another bonus to attending the pricy private school: vibrant, healthy on-campus food options. (This makes life easier for Banner, for the times when he has to find meals outside the training table.) True to a California lifestyle, USC boasts a full-service farm-to-table restaurant on campus, Moreton Fig, as well as a juice bar serving acai bowls, California's popular locally sourced cafeteria Lemonade, a Mexican grill that looks like a healthier version of Chipotle, and a spot for poke bowls just across the gate. Sure, there are the sodium-heavy college staples like Panda Express, but it's a lot easier to stay healthy when the other options are right next door.


THOUSAND OAKS, Calif. — Los Angeles waited two decades for its NFL team to return. So forgive Rams fans if they’re impatient regarding their anointed franchise quarterback, Jared Goff. Seven months after L.A. shipped a slew of high draft picks, including its No. 1 in 2017, to Tennessee for the right to select the Cal quarterback first overall, Goff has yet to play a down in the NFL. While five other rookie quarterbacks have started games this season, the No. 1 pick sits behind Case Keenum, who has the league’s fifth-lowest passer rating and threw four picks in his most recent game, the 17-10 loss to the Giants in London that dropped the Rams to 3-4.
Coach Jeff Fisher maintains that Goff will start “when he’s ready,” but calls for a quarterback change have swelled to the point that, in an interview at practice on Wednesday, Fisher felt obligated to say: “Jared Goff is still our quarterback of the future. He’s still our franchise quarterback, still in our long-term plans. It was a great trade.”

“I get it, that’s the big concern right now,” quarterbacks coach Chris Weinke told The MMQB. “Here’s the No. 1 pick, other guys have played, it’s human nature to question, why hasn’t this guy? The simplest answer is it’s a process. We’re not working on one particular thing. We’re really working on a number of variables. Could he be playing right now? Is he capable of playing in the National Football League right now? My answer would be yes. But if we’re being truly honest with ourselves, and we knew when we went through the process of drafting him, we knew it was going to take some time, and we were OK with that.”
The Rams, privately and publicly, will remind outsiders that the Eagles initially planned to reshirt Wentz, and that Prescott is only starting because of Tony Romo’s injury. But the success of those rookies—specifically of Prescott who, like Goff at Cal, played in a spread offense at Mississippi State—legitimizes the question: If the Rams believe Goff is capable of playing in the NFL, why wait?

* * *
Cultivating quarterback talent is a delicate and inexact art. A franchise’s fear is currently playing out in Jacksonville: The Jaguars wanted to sit Blake Bortles as a rookie in 2014, reversed course midseason, thrust the quarterback into action and may have stunted his long-term development. Two years later Bortles' mechanics seem out of whack. This week the Jags QB summoned a private quarterback coach to Florida for recalibration. Such anecdotes seem to shape the Rams' plan for Goff: mold the young quarterback into a polished product, then plug him in.
“If Jared Goff is playing quarterback, we’re not going to change our offense,” Weinke says. “We have a library [of plays] where we are always able to cater to the quarterback. I mean, that’s just being smart. We do that for Case Keenum, and obviously for Goff we’ll do that as well, where we call things he’s comfortable with and likes. I think we’re being smart right now in not rushing him into a position—not that he’s going to fail, we’re not saying that—but we want to put him in a position to be successful.”


* * *
At Cal, Goff operated out of the shotgun. Now he’s under center, and the footwork is different. That was the first thing Weinke and Goff worked on. “The easiest thing I’ve found is to relate it to what he’s comfortable with,” Weinke says. Weinke explained to Goff that where he used to take a three-step drop from the shotgun, now it’s simply a five-step drop under center: just add two steps. Goff had been working on his five-step drop even before the draft process, and he had the footwork down by training camp in August.

“A veteran guy doesn’t have to think about his footwork—he just does it,” Weinke says. “A young guy, he’s always thinking, and then his motor skills slow down. He learned the language, then has to think functionally and act physically.” According to Weeden, whose college offense at Oklahoma State was similar to Goff’s, adjusting to turning your back to the defense was a tremendous struggle. “That’s a really hard thing to learn,” Weinke says. “It’s awkward to turn your back to linebackers, then get your eyes up and find the defenders again.” 
The complexities stretch beyond footwork. The terminology is different, and seven months after he was handed the playbook, Goff can, according to Weinke, “speak the language and articulate it.” But he also must execute it.


Cal’s offense included run-pass options (RPOs) in which the quarterback, post-snap, chooses whether to run or pass the ball with a series of simplified reads. “As far as RPOs and packaged plays, nobody did it more than Cal,” Brown says. “Literally every play, it was layered on.”
Brown explains further: “It was a binary read—two plays going at once. Look at the weak-side linebacker; if he does this, throw it here, and if he doesn’t, hand it off. It’s not necessarily, ‘Look at the coverage and then identify which side of the field he's going to work and run a strict progression there.’ Which Goff can do, but he has to do it in a different context.”
Says Weinke: “Conceptually there were things he did in college that we do here; we just call it something different or take it to the next level, where he always has to identify the linebackers, make protection changes, every play. As it relates to run-pass options and things he did in college? We have that in our offense, so we have those things he can do. But there is more now. We hear about it all the time—how the college game is transferring, or not transferring, to the NFL game at the quarterback position. Well, here’s a case where it just takes time.”
Time means reps, and once the Rams determined in training camp that Goff wouldn’t be their starter, the bulk of first-team reps went to Keenum. While this slowed Goff’s learning process, it satisfied the Rams’ short-term interest (getting Keenum ready each week) while preserving the long-term vision. Fisher says the Rams decided to dress Goff as the third quarterback in Week 1 this season so he could see everything that Sean Mannion, the backup, did during the week to prepare. The next week Goff was promoted to No. 2 because the coaching staff felt he could play if needed. Last week’s bye afforded the opportunity for Goff to get a significant number first-team reps. But will he play?
For now it appears the Rams will finish out the plan they committed to, whether it’s right or wrong: insert Goff when they believe he is perfectly polished, then hope the wait was worth it.


OXFORD, Miss. — Chad Kelly grips the podium as he stares down two dozen journalists. The Ole Miss quarterback is about to undergo an exercise that will become very familiar over the next six months: He is going to explain his actions to a room full of strangers.
Today, it’s the media. Soon, it will be NFL teams trying to get a better read on one of the 2017 draft’s most polarizing prospects. Everything he does on the field is ripe for scrutiny; he is at times electrifying and at times infuriating. Everything he does off the field is fodder for the 24/7 college football news cycle.
On this Monday in early October, Kelly is doing damage control. Three days earlier, during the Rebels’ bye week, he had attended younger brother Casey’s high school game in Buffalo. Casey, a quarterback at St. Joseph’s Collegiate (also Chad’s alma mater), took a late hit out of bounds. Players traded shoves. Chad bolted from the stands and ran onto the field. The scuffle swelled. The game was suspended. The headlines all weekend: “Chad Kelly involved in high school football brawl.”
Now he will speak publicly about it for the first time since. It’s nearly 75 degrees outside, but Kelly wears black suede boots (they are Yeezy’s), grey jeans with ripped detailing at the knees (he designed them himself) and a red Ole Miss polo.
“Well, first, that’s a bad decision on my part that I made,” he says. “If I could have done it differently, I would have. I obviously wouldn’t have run out on the field, of course. I regret doing it. But at the same time, I’m sure any of us, if we saw a family member out there who needed help, we would have come to the rescue too. But looking forward to the next game, we have to keep working hard and make the right decisions.”
Kelly speaks for another five minutes. By the time he exits, headlines have moved on to his apology.
More than thirty years ago, in a drastically different college football landscape, Jim Kelly was a big-armed, wild-at-heart draft prospect from the University of Miami. Now, he is a Hall of Fame quarterback and Buffalo Bills legend. He’s also Chad Kelly’s uncle.
“Sometimes I look at what he has to deal with and it’s crazy,” says Jim Kelly. “Apologize for a brawl? He wasn't involved in no freakin’ brawl! Nobody’s talking about what they did to his little brother, who was down on the ground with the other guys kicking him, hitting him, ripping his helmet off. Chad just ran down there to help. The thing about the Kelly’s is we stick together. If that was one of my younger brothers, damn straight I’d do the same thing.
“But if you’re Chad, you have to understand from the outside, a little thing can turn into a big thing because of your past. From here on, every little thing he does is going to blow up.”
* * *
Kelly is the country’s most talented senior quarterback. Davis Webb, Jared Goff’s successor at Cal, and Central Michigan’s Cooper Rush generate some buzz, but at this point it’s hard to imagine any other senior meriting a pick in the draft’s first two days. Kelly is ruggedly built (6-foot-2, 224 pounds) with a big arm. He’s athletic and his ability to scramble commands respect, yet he’s comfortable in the pocket—sometimes too comfortable. He can hang in unnecessarily and take big hits. For instance, in the third game of the year, Alabama linebacker Reuben Foster rammed into Kelly so hard that Foster sustained a black eye. Kelly earned a tick on the toughness checklist for staying on the field for the next play.

Says an NFL evaluator: “No doubt he has an NFL arm, and some of his habits can be fixed.”
The bigger concerns rise when teams look off the field.
“I do think there are legitimate concerns off the field. If you’re going to take him, especially if you’re going to take him high, you’re really going to need to ask: Does this guy get it?”



When NFL scouts come to Oxford, Ole Miss coaches emphasize that the team keeps a “distraction” list for players who are late to class or miss assignments; Kelly has never been on the list. Coaches tell the story of the aftermath of last year’s Sugar Bowl win, when they returned to campus after a recruiting visit to find Kelly in the film room scouting 2016 opponents.
“If [an NFL team] asks about Chad this is exactly what I’ll tell them,” says quarterbacks coach Dan Werner. “Since he’s been here, he’s done everything I’ve asked him. He’s gotten basically all A’s and B’s. He’s played great for us and he loves the game of football.”

* * *
Growing up in Buffalo, Chad was often known first and foremost as “Jim Kelly’s nephew.” Jim’s only son, Hunter, died of a rare nervous system disease at age 8. Chad is Jim’s godson.
“I taught him how to hold a football, the three-step, the five-step, high release all those things that dads or uncles do,” Jim says. Chad was the star of Jim’s football camp, and his legend grew in Western New York. He is the only winner of four national Punt, Pass and Kick competitions. “There was pressure for me for as long as I can remember,” Chad says. “Once in an interview I said it’s hard to be Jim Kelly’s nephew and people killed me for that. It became a huge thing. I learned not to say that anymore.”
While Jim was starring for the Bills, Chad’s father, Kevin, the youngest of Jim’s five brothers, made his career at Wegman’s grocery store. Kevin was relocated to different chain when Chad was in high school, and Chad enrolled at Red Lion High School in Pennsylvania. He was suspended as a freshman, then kicked off the team his sophomore year. He moved back to Western New York to live with his maternal grandparents, who helped pay for private school. “When my parents didn’t have any money and I was living with my grandparents I didn’t know what I was going to do with my life,” Chad says. “But I felt like I had a right arm that was really special and a mind to read defenses at such a young age. That’s why I love this game. For three or four hours, I can not think about anything else but football.”
At Clemson, he never had a chance to find that solitude on the field, and he didn’t know how to handle it. He redshirted in 2012, then tore his ACL in next year’s spring game. He appeared in five games as the No. 3 quarterback in 2013 and was in a three-way competition for the job in the spring game in 2014 before he was dismissed. “I thought I was going to be able to play after redshirting and this and that, and I was like, man, should I just play lacrosse now?” Kelly says. “Lacrosse was one of my first loves. I told the coach [Dabo Swinney], ‘If I’m not the starting quarterback, I’d love to go play lacrosse.’ There’s Major League Lacrosse, and I might not make a lot of money if I do that, but I could do other things on top of that. And then I got kicked off the team.”
Looking back, Kelly sees the immaturity (and the absurdity) of that stance. “I wasn’t thinking about my future,” he says.
When he drove Casey home on Friday night after the high school scuffle, Kelly says he told his brother: “You have a lot of people gunning for you, you have a lot of people who want to be in your spot just as bad as they wanted to be in my spot. That’s just part of the game. We need to be smart about it.”
* * *
When Kelly arrived at Ole Miss there were two other quarterbacks who had each been in the system for two years. “Chad had a really strong arm and you could tell he knew the game of football,” Werner says. “I was worried that because we run a no huddle; not only does he need to know plays but how to call them at the line.” Over that summer, Kelly worked with receivers Laquon Treadwell and Stringfellow to get in tune with timing. By the end of fall camp in 2015, the job was Kelly’s. “We were all a bit surprised how fast he learned it,” Werner says. “He’s a workaholic.”
When Jim Kelly worked with his nephew for a few days last summer, Chad insisted on throwing and throwing while Jim insisted his nephew ice up his arm.
“He has a work ethic I never had,” Jim says. “He just wants to play so bad.
“I’m also just amazed by his arm strength, being able to throw from the college hash, throw a deep comeback on the opposite side. I’m a big advocate of footwork and it’s going to be a change when he’s out of the gun formation and has to go under center. I also don’t like when he gets flat-footed in the pocket. But after the season Uncle Jim is going to become Coach Jim and we’re going to work all of those things.”
Though Ole Miss is stumbling, 3-4 and unranked for the first time this season, Kelly’s decision making seems to be improving. “There’s still two or three decisions every game I wish I had back,” he says. “They might not result in turnovers, but an errant throw or a throw to close coverage where I probably should have worked to my next read.”
Says Werner: “He’s really been working on it since the beginning of last year, and I think he’s getting a lot better. But the thing most people don’t understand is, the deep throws down field, that’s part of our offensive philosophy. People think that taking a shot is a gamble, but if the safeties are low and you’re making them at the right time, they’re not.”
And Kelly has found stability in Oxford. He’s become close friends with his roommate, Stringfellow, the receiver with a checkered past of his own. (He transferred to Ole Miss after being suspended from Washington’s program due to his involvement in two assaults during the aftermath of the Seattle Seahawks’ Super Bowl XLVIII victory. He pleaded guilty to one count of third-degree malicious mischief and was sentenced to work-crew duty and community service.) “We get along really well,” Kelly says. “We’ve both been in trouble before and we both know that we got a second chance, but we might not get a third.”
And Kelly has a back-up quarterback who can relate to him.
“Chad always did have the pressure of being Jim Kelly’s nephew, and maybe I could understand that more than most because of who my dad is,” says senior Drew Davis, son of former Miami, North Carolina and Cleveland Browns coach Butch Davis. “But Chad always tried to be his own person, he never wanted that title of ‘Jim Kelly’s nephew.’
“You could tell when he got to Ole Miss that he knew what he wanted to do, and that he had to do everything he was supposed to in order to get back on that track. When NFL scouts come down here I really think they’re going to see that Chad isn’t the guy they saw in the news from years ago. He’s a different person since he’s been down here, he’s focused.”
Jim Kelly wants nothing more than for the past to stay there. “What pisses me off as an uncle: Every single time you talk about Chad, you start off with, ‘Well he was kicked off Clemson.’ That was [two and a half] years ago.”
* * *
In three months, the scrutiny will intensify for Kelly. It’s a few minutes after that October press conference, when he had to explain his actions at his brother’s high school game. We’re sitting in a quiet room at the Ole Miss facility. I ask him to pretend it’s a mock interview, that I’m a general manager and I want to know why my organization should draft him.
Kelly looks me in the eye: “I have it all. I might not have the same mojo as your basic quarterback, but I feel like I bring a different type of swag to the team and the players around me. I have friends all across that field. When I go out there on the field, I play with a different attitude that you usually don’t see in a quarterback. I play with a swag they’ve never seen before.”

“Off the field,” Kelly says, not missing a beat. “Can we trust you?”
“I think you can,” he says. “The decisions I made that resulted in bad things happening, I was thinking of other people and just trying to help other people before I thought of myself. Yeah, I took it upon myself to make decisions that, at the time, I thought were good ideas, but at the end of the day they only hurt me. Thinking of other people at that time, that’s what got me in trouble. Now with social media and the media the way it is today, it’s a totally different game than it was 30 years ago when my uncle played. You just gotta grow up.”

* * *

He’s a defensive end, so I went against him in practice every single day. It’s hard to go against a guy like that because he’s very technically sound. I’m not just saying that because he’s my brother. He made me better every day. His best attributes are how he sheds blockers and can take double teams. He’s very stout and has great hands. He’s a big effort guy, he’s a guy you know won’t give up on a play ever. I really enjoy watching him play this year; it sucks I’m not there to watch him in person but he’s doing a great job. It’s also weird that we’re not playing together. Now that I’m in the NFL, I can tell he has the skill to play at this level. And I can’t wait to face him again, though it will probably be in a game that matters, not just practice.
* * *




* * *
It has been more than a year since Ohio State last won a game against Penn State.
Shocking, I know. But that’s what happens when the Nittany Lions (representing a school that has produced many fine journalists, such as Emily Kaplan and Jenny Vrentas of The MMQB) climbs back from a 21-7 fourth-quarter hole, blocks a field goal, and records its first win over a top-five team since 1999. Did I mention Penn State was unranked and still weathering effects from sanctions and scholarship reductions?


* * *





* * *


There you have it. High school recruits, do you want to be a college team captain one day? Go ask your parents to sign you up for a game show.

* * *

As the color analyst for the Crimson Tide Radio Network, I always utilize our bye week as an opportunity go see a number of "small college" prospects for the Reese’s Senior Bowl. This year, my trip will take me to and through the state of Pennsylvania with a few hours spent in eastern Ohio.



It will be back to the "big schools" on Thursday night when my journey ends at Heinz Field, where Pittsburgh will host Virginia Tech in a pivotal ACC Coastal matchup.

* * *
Oxford, Mississippi might be the quintessential Southern college town, and Ajax is its token greasy diner. First, downtown Oxford: I think the only word that you can use to describe it is “adorable.” The Square is rows of restaurants, boutiques and cafes encircling the county courthouse, which is a regal white building with a very well-manicured lawn. Square Books might make my top 10 for best independent bookstores. I really appreciated their cafe on the second-floor balcony. But Ajax diner is the place to eat. I was stuck on the menu until the man next to me at the counter insisted I get a “Big Easy.” Local legend has it that Eli Manning invented that sandwich. Or maybe he just ordered it every time he came. Or maybe he came up with the name for it. I heard at least three variations of the story in my hour and a half there. Either way, I figured it was an inevitable choice. The sandwich: country-fried steak topped with mashed potatoes, gravy and butter beans. There was definitely a layer of butter on the bun, and maybe even some butter swirled in to the potato and bean concoctions. It was slimy, messy, rich, and pretty delicious. This is coming from someone who usually doesn’t like gravy and might not have ever had country-fried steak or butter beans in her life. It was 2 p.m. and I was starving, but I could barely finish half. I like to think the only way Eli would eat that would be as a post-game meal. It would definitely be comforting, win or loss, and he probably wouldn’t have had to jump right in his car and drive an hour and a half to the Memphis airport.


GREENVILLE, Ohio — With beads of sweat of dripping from his hairline and his thin-wired glasses fogging up, a young man toils away with a sledgehammer in July’s unforgiving midday heat. Surrounded by cornfields as far as the eye can see, he lifts the hammer above his shoulders and slams it down on a small piece of raw timber.

Exhausted, he drops his shoulders after 10 minutes of constant bashing and locks eyes with his ever-watchful teacher.
“I don’t know,” the young man says. “I might be done.”
“Are you kidding me?” the teacher barks back. “Don’t f------ quit. You made it this far.”
He adjusts his grip and unleashes 22 more thwacks, pounding the wood until a piece breaks off and falls to the dirt. Mission accomplished, he mic-drops the sledgehammer and gives his teacher a high-five. The gesture, however commonplace, says everything about the unlikely bond between Luis Matos, a 17-year-old former gang member from Worcester, Mass., and Matt Light, the former offensive lineman for the New England Patriots.
“If it weren’t for Matt Light,” says Luis’s mother, Maritza, “my son would not be alive right now. He would be dead, or he would be lost. He would have no future.”
* * *
For a decade, Matt Light protected Tom Brady’s blind side, starting 155 games and fortifying an offense that won seven division championships, four conference titles and three Super Bowls. Now he spends his days looking out for at-risk teens such as Luis, whose journey over the past four years has included running away from home, joining a gang, being arrested for illegally possessing a weapon and damaging personal property, having his older brother die from a heroin overdose and, at one point, telling Light “go f--- yourself and get out of my life.”
“Kids like Luis, sometimes the system fails them, sometime it ignores them, sometimes they just need a push,” Light says. “But they can all be saved. You can’t save them by just saying you want to help, and you can’t just throw money at the problem. To reach a kid like Luis, you need to put in the time. To effectively make a change in their life, it’s not easy. Sometimes you need to give them tough love.”
When Light retired from the NFL in 2011, his hometown wanted to host a Matt Light Day and put his name on all the signs at the edge of town. “Matt freaked out,” his wife, Susie, says. “He said absolutely not. That’s just not him.” Light instead honored his roots by purchasing a few downtown properties (he’s a coffee house landlord) and 600 acres of farmland in Greenville, where he grew up riding tractors, hunting turkeys and fishing in the streams.
In 2008, in conjunction with the foundation he started as a player, Light launched the Vohokase Cultural Leadership Camp, which brings 16 underprivileged teenagers to his family’s compound each year to experience a country summer. Four new campers are brought into the program each year and stay in it for four years. Light and Nick Schuckman, the program’s director, call the teens a few times each month and make home visits twice a year to points all over the country. “I was tired of organizations that talk about doing things,” Light says, “and don't get down in the dirt and do it.”
For 10 days each summer, the campers play in Greenville’s dirt. They see to their chores in the morning (cleaning bathrooms, bussing tables after breakfast) and then have paintball outings, race go-karts and volunteer in the community (playing bingo at a nursing home, for example). The teens are also exposed to workplace norms. One of Light’s former high school teammates runs a local slaughterhouse, where the campers toured the meat freezer and examined carcasses. “Now you see how hard it is to run a small business?” Light said as a few boys winced at an open freezer. “But it’s important to always support those in your community.”
Light’s four children mingle among the campers; his mother and mother-in-law take off work to cook meals (like four dozen cheesy skillet eggs for breakfast). Greenville pitches in too. For the camper’s annual pizza-making challenge, the local pizzeria donates the dough and sauce while the owner serves as the judge. Each night ends with a fireside chat, where the teens are encouraged to speak openly and honestly about their lives.
“Some of this stuff is stuff we’d never be exposed to at home,” says William Slate, a third-year camper from Louisiana. “These people aren’t really people I’d get a chance to connect with.”
Adds Dylan Pope, a second-year camper from Ohio, “I think that’s why we all grow up so much while we’re here.”

* * *

“It used to be an OK place to raise a family, with many hard-working people,” says Maritza, who left Puerto Rico in 1986 as a teenager and settled here with her family. “But it changed. There became drugs and gangs.”
When the local Boys & Girls Club referred Luis to Light’s foundation in January 2013, Maritza was ecstatic. “It felt like someone was looking after my boy,” she says.
Luis loved his first summer in Greenville. “I was doing fun things I never thought I’d do in my life, and I met some cool people,” he says. When they volunteered at the local church festival, the counselors received more compliments about him than any other camper.
During his second summer in Greenville, the counselors noticed some disengagement. Luis didn’t want to participate in activities, and he mouthed off to counselors. By his third year in the program Luis’s grades were slipping. He was kicked off his school’s basketball team for acting out several times; school officials also found a knife in his backpack. He was sent to two different alternative schools. When Light and Schuckman visited that winter, Light asked, “What’s going on, man? You’re different.”
“At that point it was clear. He was involved with a gang,” Schuckman says. “We only get them for 10 days in the summer, then try to be there for them throughout the year. But the gangs—they do the same thing we try to do, which is make you feel like you’re part of their family. The problem is, they have exposure to him all year long.”
* * *
During Luis’s 2015 summer trip to Greenville, Light had several long discussions with the troubled teen. They went on long walks together, but Luis either wouldn’t listen or kept talking back. So Light toughened his approach.
“You’re going to waste your life away,” he said.
Luis stared at Light and told him, “Go f---yourself.”
Within 24 hours of returning home at the end of camp, Luis snuck out of the house via a third-story window. For 30 days he lived on the streets, sleeping at friends’ houses, at houses of fellow gang members, or in unlocked cars parked on the street. Picked up by police along with another teen, Luis was arrested on a weapons charge. The other teenager, who was let go, ended up getting shot later that day.
“The minute I find out about this, I’m calling every place in the country that takes kids like this who have screwed up,” says Light, who was in contact with Luis’s case officer from the department of youth services. “Let me fulfill my commitment to this kid,” Light pleaded.
Two days before Luis’s court hearing, Maritza awoke to a heartbreaking call. Her other son, Reynaldo, had been found dead on a park bench in Worcester Commons. He overdosed on heroin. He was 24.
The judge allowed Luis to leave jail with an escort for the viewing. He and his mother cried together. Luis was inconsolable. “Why did you leave me?” he wailed. “Who is going to protect me now?”
On the day of Luis’ sentencing for damaging personal property and a weapons charge, Light arrived in court. “You should’ve seen the judge’s face when he walked in,” Maritza says. “She was talking to the D.A. and then she was star-struck. She said, ‘I’ve never had this big a celebrity in my courtroom.’ ”
At least one person in the courtroom wasn’t impressed.
“You should’ve seen the glare Luis gave me,” Light says. “He was like, ‘Oh s----.”
“I wanted him to go away,” Luis says. “I didn’t want him in my life trying to make decisions for me.”

“I ain’t going to Utah,” Luis told Light as they huddled privately. “I ain’t going somewhere where I can’t see my girl. I’m not doing what you said.”
Light nearly shouted: “This ain’t bush leagues, son. You’re not going to see your girl. You screwed up and you are going to need to serve time in jail.”
Luis fell silent.

Maritza sobbed in the back of the courtroom. “I had just lost one son,” she says, “and I knew if Luis didn’t listen to Matt Light, I would probably lose another.”
“It was probably 10 minutes before he spoke,” Light says. “But it felt like forever.”
Luis finally nodded. He was on a plane to Utah the next day.
* * *
Luis lived in Utah from September 2015 to June 2016 and earned his high school diploma a year ahead of schedule. When Light and Schuckman visited last winter, Luis showed them how he was able to ride horses and corral cows. He’d also begun lifting weights and decided on a career path: He wanted to work with the elderly.
Light and Shuckman saw that he missed his mother, so they flew Maritza out as a surprise. Luis was reduced to tears when he saw her. “The amount of money they put [up for] my son to be out there, it’s like paying my rent, my bills, my car insurance and then another $1,000 on top of that a month,” says Maritza, who works as a phlebotomist in Worcester-area hospitals. “I am so speechless for that. But they were there for my son. What do I say to the people who have given my son life?”
After the Storm Ridge program, Luis flew straight to Greenville for his last summer as a camper. One day, the campers were tasked with using a sledgehammer to pound raw pieces of wood through a small hole and transforming them into pegs that would be used in a new fence.
Dripping with sweat, Luis looked up at Light and asked, “Can’t I be done?”
“Not until you finish,” Light told his ultimate work-in-progress.
Luis thwacked the sledgehammer a few more times until an unrefined piece of wood had been transformed into a smooth peg. As he dropped it in a nearby bucket, he noticed one of the younger campers struggling with the hammer.
“Here,” Luis said, reaching out his hand. “Let me show you how.”


GLENCOE, Ill.—Carol Haddon opens the door to her suburban Chicago home 45 minutes before Game 3 of the National League Championship Series between the Cubs and Dodgers is to begin. She is wearing plastic baseball earrings that are the size of golf balls, and they jingle as she moves around. “They’re good luck earrings, and I got them at the gift store, but they don’t make them anymore,” she says, “So when they’re gone, they’re gone.”

She pauses. “However, he was the beginning of bad luck.”





She can rattle off the guy she had casual conversations with—"Hey, how are you?" "How’s your tennis game?"—and knew her by name, but it might be easier to list who she hadn’t met. When Jim Leyland wasn’t managing anymore and returned to Wrigley as a scout, he asked an usher to lead him to Haddon. And Ozzie Smith, “Oh he was the cream of the crop for the St. Louis Cardinals, but he was one of my favorites,” she says. At Smith’s very last game at Wrigley, in 1996, he took the jersey off his back, and handed it to Haddon.  













"Imagine what it’s like serving to Pete Rose,” she says. "We held our own so much that they invited me back three weeks later. And in that match, we won the first set. Let’s just say Pete wasn’t happy about that.”

MADISON, Wis. — The breakout star of Wisconsin’s overachieving defense joined the Badgers in 2013 as a tight end. He injured his right knee in 2014, his left knee in 2015. He underwent surgery, then rehab, then a position change. Fourteen months after “learning the basic things, like where defensive players put their hands”—his words—he’s one of the Big Ten’s most disruptive linebackers. He humbled Leonard Fournette in Week 1, tormented Michigan State in Week 4 and absorbed double-teams and protection slides against Michigan in Week 5, still finishing with 11 tackles, two for loss, a sack and a quarterback hurry.
The ascent of outside linebacker T.J. Watt is a rich tale. And by virtue of being a Watt, it’s a predictable one. He is the last of the Watt brothers to come through Madison. Derek, two years older, is now a fullback on the Chargers. J.J., the eldest, needs no introduction.
Entering Saturday’s primetime battle with No. 2 Ohio State, T.J. Watt leads the Big Ten with 5.5 sacks. Two evaluators said that if the 6-foot-5, 243-pound junior enters this year’s draft, he will have, at minimum, a second-round grade.
You cannot tell the story of T.J. Watt without tracing the paths of his brothers. Take, for example, T.J.’s recruitment. “I actually thought about some other schools, and I was interested in Nebraska,” T.J. says. “But they kind of backed off recruiting me. I think it was because of my name. They just assumed a Watt would go to Wisconsin.”

There’s three beats of dead silence. He asserts his seriousness.
“Doesn’t that sound great?”
* * *
Connie and John Watt instilled a work ethic in their sons. Connie, who did not attend college, became vice president of an independent inspections company. John was a firefighter for more than two decades. Both are now retired, with Connie running J.J.’s foundation, affording her time to nurture her youngest son. Pewaukee, the parents’ hometown, is an hour East of Madison, perfect distance for laundry service. “Let’s just say I misplaced my campus laundry card a while ago,” T.J. says. “And I haven’t made much effort to find it.”
As the youngest, T.J. enjoys extra perks—like home-cooked meals away from home. When Connie visits campus, most fall weekends, she brings trays of chicken fried rice and other T.J. favorites, along with takeout containers of individualized portions for the week. Cooking is central in Watt world. John often cooked at the firehouse. Connie wasn’t always the best chef, according to T.J., who recalls spitting out her ravioli in middle school, but has since become “excellent.” Explains T.J., reciting what is likely a family mantra: “Shows that if you work hard at anything, you can be great!”
In 2014, when T.J. was nursing a knee injury and Derek had a broken foot, Connie and John temporarily moved into an on-campus hotel, chauffeuring their sons to classes. “I think from J.J. they just know how hard it is to get to a certain level,” says T.J., recalling how his older brother was a walk-on at Wisconsin who needed to earn his scholarship, and spent summers driving Pizza Hut delivery. “And they want to make sure we have all the tools.

T.J. is close with Derek, but is a clone of J.J. personality-wise. “It’s like we share the same brain,” says T.J., who matches his brother’s obsession with maximization. He spent his one off week this summer crashing at J.J.’s house in Houston. There are other perks to being J.J.’s little bro: T.J.’s knee surgery in 2015 was preformed by Texans team surgeon, Dr. Walter Lowe.
The walls of T.J.’s Madison apartment are plastered with motivational quotes. When J.J. underwent back surgery last month, T.J. selected a quote and texted it to him. He has sent one nearly every day since. “People who don’t like inspirational quotes are the people who read them, but don’t actually comprehend them or take them to heart,” says T.J.
That’s not the only thing on the Watt brothers’ text thread. T.J. says he returns to the locker room after a Wisconsin game to sometimes hundreds of messages—Derek and J.J. commenting and critiquing every single play.

* * *
When T.J. returned to practice in July 2015, coach Paul Chryst suggested a switch from tight end to defense—the same move J.J. had made seven years earlier. T.J. queued YouTube clips of pass rushers like Von Miller, Lawrence Taylor and, of course, his brother, and decided to give it a go.
He began fall camp in 2015 on a pitch count because of the injury. If the Badgers had two-a-days, Watt could only participate in one portion. In a 24-period practice, he could only go for 16 and needed to spend breaks icing. He hadn’t played a live football game since his senior year of high school in 2013. “Because we had two seniors at his position, we were able to bring him along slowly,” says outside linebackers coach Tim Tibesar. Four games into the year, Watt was folded into third-down pass-rushing packages. “Not shockingly, he has some natural pas rush instincts,” Tibesar says. In some of those situations, Watt was on the interior as a nose guard. “And he showed great football intelligence,” Tibesar says. “He could probably pick up any position.” When an injury forced the staff to push outside linebacker backer Jack Cichy inside, Watt inherited regular playing time.
“God only makes so many guys who are 6-foot-5, 240 pounds who can run like he can,” Tibesar says. “And then if you have his work ethic….”
T.J. monitors his sleep; he aims for nine hours a night. He is keenly aware of every calorie he devours. “You don’t need to diet,” he says. “Just whole, nutritious meals and not junk.”

Watt claims he has few interests other than football. “I don’t go out on weekends,” he says. “After games, I’ll literally sit in my apartment and watch football. I have it instilled in me from my brothers, J.J. especially, minimal gains and marginal gains, you can be one percent better. I honestly believe that if I stay in, there’s probably a player from Michigan State or Ohio State going out drinking beer, and I have to be getting better than him.”
Watt’s arrival this season felt shocking, though coaches insist the ascent began last spring. Watt is particularly proud of a fourth-and-1 stop of Fournette in the season-opener at Lambeau Field. “I’m telling you, he was looking at me that whole time in the huddle,” Watt says. “He was making eye contact with me. I knew that Fournette was going to run that ball right at me.” Cichy made a good play to pave the way for Watt, who took out the first tight end, the puller on the play, then tripped Fournette by the ankle for the stuff. “If you’re going to stop a fourth-down play and everyone knows it’s run and they know it and we know it, you have to win,” Wilcox says. “And that’s what T.J. does.”
Watt is constantly obsessing over what he can do better. He wants to get lower pad level (“of course he does,” Wilcox says, “he’s 6-foot-5, but where he’s at is not bad”) and improve on pass rush moves. “Jeez, it’s hard to get to the passer!” Watt. says. “My brother makes it look so easy.”
Another way T.J.’s life is mirroring J.J.’s: Opponents are now game-planning specifically to stop him. Michigan was the first game that star senior linebacker Vince Biegel missed, and in the first 35 to 40 plays, Watt had zero tackles. “It wasn’t that he was playing poorly,” Tibesar says. “The ball just wasn’t going his way.” Wisconsin adjusted, Watt began to play more freely, and over the next 35 plays he had 10 tackles.
Though J.J. socializes with celebrities and becomes selfie-bait anytime he steps out in public, the spotlight is still uncomfortable for T.J., who pulls the brim of his hat low to hide his face while walking across campus.
“There’s one guy in one of my classes who sits in front of me and is literally commenting on Wisconsin football message boards,” Watt says. “I know he writes about me. It’s kind of odd.”
Watt mulls the situation, and decides the path of least awkward resistance: “I guess I should just go up to him and say, ‘Hey, I’m T.J.’”

* * *

“That’s a guy that’s full effort on every play. Every single play. You respect a guy like that, because he’s got your back and you want to make sure you have his, too. I think he’s just as good against the run as he is in [pass situations]. He’s a very good defensive tackle but he could also go outside at defensive end. He can go out and get off blocks very well. He’s quick off the ball. He also has very good technique. Jonathan can play at the NFL level, no doubt. He’s been ready to play in this league for some time.”

* * *
You’re in luck if you live in Ann Arbor and enjoy a good prime rib.
The local Ruth’s Chris Steakhouse advertised a promotion before Michigan’s game against Rutgers: If the Wolverines won, customers would receive a percentage discount matching the margin of victory.
Luckily (for the manager), the discount was capped 50 percent. Because the Fighting Jim Harbaughs obliterated Big Ten bottom feeder Rutgers, 78-0 on Saturday. The Scarlet Knights didn’t get a first down until the fourth quarter. Michigan out-gained Rutgers 600 to 39. Those are just two of many ridiculous stats I could spew out about Rutgers’ ineptitude, but let’s focus on the positive for Rutgers fans: Spend a nine-hour drive broiling in your own frustrations, and you can get a good steak for pretty cheap.
However, you had to make your reservation early…
Important promotional update: Tried to get a reservation at the Ann Arbor Ruth's Chris and it's completely booked all week.
* * *




* * *





* * *




* * *
I drove to Madison last week excited about one Wisconsin export only: Spotted Cow. For the unfamiliar, the New Glarus beer obtained cult status in the Midwest, mostly because it can’t be sold past state lines. Genius marketing. I’m a fan—it’s a crisp, easy-drinking cream ale—but non-Sconnies treat it like liquid gold. Gas stations right over the border have signs plastered at the door listing the various bottle sizes and case sizes of Spotted Cow they carry. So yeah, I have a case in my fridge right now.



KALAMAZOO, Mich. — Here’s what it’s like to be Big Man on Campus: At 8:30 a.m. on Wednesday, Corey Davis reports to Western Michigan’s wide receiver meeting room. He plops his binder on a desk in the front row, ready to take notes. Mounted in front of him is a cartoonishly large photo portrait of… himself.
Over the summer, WMU staffers were tasked with redecoration. For meeting rooms, they chose portraits of two Bronco greats at each position. And at wideout one of them is Davis.
“The guys give Corey some crap for that photo,” says wide receivers coach Matt Simon.
“They didn’t even tell me they were going to put it up!” Davis protests. “One day, I show up and it’s just there. It’s kind of weird just starting at yourself. It’s an O.K. picture I guess…. I think my eyes might be closed though.”
For Davis, it might be the only complaint he has in 2016. Western Michigan is 4-0 entering Saturday’s Mid-American Conference rivalry game against Central Michigan. Leveraging momentum from their first-ever bowl win, the Broncos have knocked off two Big Ten teams—Northwestern and Illinois, both on the road. At the center of it all is Davis, a 6-foot-2, 205-pound polished route runner with outstanding hands and the athleticism for the next level. Had Davis declared for the NFL in 2015, one scout says he could have gone late first round. The only other MAC receiver ever taken in Round 1? Marshall’s Randy Moss, in 1998.
But Davis returned to school, in large part to work toward his degree. On the field this season, coaches have slid him around the formation to create opportunities—Davis lines up in the slot, out wide, and runs nearly every route. He has been swarmed by double teams, yet is still averaging six catches for 99 yards and a touchdown per game. At the pace he is currently on, he’ll leave college football atop the FBS all time career receiving yards list. (He’s 825 away with eight regular-season games to go, plus a likely bowl game and potentially the MAC championship game.)

But first, the coach instructs his pupils to tear off a sheet of paper. “Write down one thing that you want in your life. Maybe it’s a championship. Maybe it’s a car. Just write down one thing you want, and hand it over to me.”

* * *
Davis was born in South Side, Chicago, and his family moved to the suburb of Wheaton when he was in kindergarten. He was the second-youngest of seven children. The Davis family all had athletic potential. Older brother Titus, now 23, was a star receiver at Central Michigan and spent last season on the Jets practice squad. Money was tight and food was scarce in the four-bedroom house. Structure was an issue. Corey skipped school often. When he asked his Pee Wee coach, Dan Graham, for a ride home from practice one day, it soon became a habit.
Dan’s son, Ryan, and Corey became close. By junior year of high school, when Davis says things hit rock bottom at home, the Grahams offered to take him in. Dan Graham is now Corey’s legal guardian, though Corey still has a relationship with his biological parents. (Ryan Graham is the quarterback at MAC West rival Northern Illinois.)
College prospects seemed bleak for Davis, whose transcript did not feature a grade above a C. The Grahams helped arrange tutors and set guidelines for him to graduate. Davis says he generated some interest from Division-1 programs, but nobody would commit to him.
Meanwhile in Kalamazoo, P.J. Fleck was hired as coach of Western Michigan in December 2013, off a stint as the wide receivers coach for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (Fleck is part of the Greg Schiano coaching tree). Scrambling to assemble a class before National Signing Day, Fleck, an Illinois native, reached out to every coach he knew in the area.
Enamored by Davis’s story, Fleck offered him a scholarship. “When I got to WMU,” Davis says, “I felt like I had a purpose.”
Fleck, now 35, was the youngest coach in FBS until Memphis hired Mike Norvell last December. He’s known for his high-octane personality. He leads practices barking through a microphone headset normally reserved for group fitness instructors. During his one-hour team meeting on Wednesday, he dropped his preferred word, “elite,” nine times, and catered his message around donuts—including handing out a frosted dozen and swinging a baseball bat. (The overarching theme: fill in the missing holes.)
“Ohio State has what?” he barked at 7:59 a.m. “Tradition!” the team responds.
“Michigan has what?” Fleck asked. “Tradition,” they respond.
“You all have some tradition, but you also get to create your own.”
Fleck’s best player is his polar opposite from a personality standpoint. During Fleck’s speech, Davis sat in the front row, silent. Nearly everyone in and around the program describes Davis as shy. He spent all summer at campus. In the fall, if he’s not at class or at the football building for organized activities, he’s at the football building. Simon has often arrived at his office to find Davis already there, scrolling through plays on the coach’s laptop. “It’s not like he works to be seen,” Simon says. “Like, ‘Hey I'm working over here!’ He wants to work in silence and he wants to work quite literally when nobody is watching.”
When scouts visit campuses to do recon on prospects, they’ll often ask: Does the player love football? Davis shows without telling, by staying after every practice to shag balls. Sometimes he’ll do distraction drills, implemented by Fleck and Simon: They’ll run through more than 100 ball drills, sometimes using cut-open footballs, other times lacrosse or tennis balls. This perhaps explains why drops are rare for Davis. According to Pro Football Focus, Davis had just 15 drops on 183 catchable passes through last year.
“At first Corey didn't want to lead,” Simon says. “He wanted to do his job and do it the very best he could. But he developed the mindset: If I do it and just tell someone else they should, they’ll do it.”
* * *
Davis will likely leave campus in December, some 20 credits shy of graduating. And though he admits, “I’ve always hated school, I always hate going to classes,” Simon says Davis has been booking appointments with academic advisors on his own to make sure he will stay on track.
“The NFL was his end goal, but it was never his motivation,” Simon says. “He understood that he wanted to change his life from what it was when he grew up. He’s using the NFL as motivation to be able to do that. But what truly motivates him is not living the life that he had. He wants a family, he wants kids, and he doesn't want this family to go through what he had.”


Still, Davis gets genuinely bashful when he thinks about the attention he’s getting. “It’s so weird when I walk on campus and there’s people whispering, ‘Is that Corey Davis? Oh my god, that’s him,’” he says.
An hour later, walking through his academic building, Davis is oblivious to two co-eds on the staircase below, ogling him. One opens the Snapchat app on her phone. (It doesn’t hurt that Davis is wearing a team-issued button-down; Fleck requires all players to wear collared shirts to class.)
Before he enters his 3 p.m. class, I ask Davis what he wrote down in the wide receivers’ meeting room earlier that morning. What does he really want in life?
“I just wrote, ‘I want to be remembered.’”

* * *

“Jamal is an aggressive guy. We play with the same kind of attitude. Jamal plays with a lot of energy, he’s always flying around. He’s a solid football player. He doesn’t try to force anything, he lets the plays come to him. He is super smart, has a very high football IQ. As soon as he came in as a freshman, he impressed all of us with how quickly he was able to adapt. For sure he can play in the NFL. He’s for sure going to be one of the top guys in the draft this year. I feel like once he gets in the NFL he’s going to adjust incredibly quick and make the same plays he’s making in college.”

* * *





* * *
Football coaches love Dr. Seuss.

“Every message that a coach gives his team is in that book,” Koetter told us.

“Oh yeah,” he says, fetching his copy from a bookcase hidden behind a leather couch.

By the time I returned to Chicago that night, I found myself making a pit stop at Barnes & Noble and buying myself a copy.

* * *





* * *





* * *
When I first moved to Chicago, I figured I’d be cool and order Goose Island at any bar I went to. Turns out, most Chicagoans consider local beer to be any beer in the Midwest*. Which is great, because I was introduced to Bell’s—I really like the Oberon. The Bell’s brewery is in Kalamazoo, less than two miles from WMU’s campus. They have a very cute beer garden that actually looks like a garden—stone paths, potted shrubbery, picnic tables and all. It’s called the Eclectic Cafe, and the 5 p.m. weekday crowd certainly fit its billing: Me bumming around on my laptop, a table of four college guys who must have chugged five IPAs each in an hour, an elderly man playing the guitar and a middle-aged couple literally nibbling on deviled eggs.



Entering last season, DeShone Kizer was just another quarterback buried on Notre Dame’s depth chart. He came to South Bend a three-sport high school athlete who never attended specialized quarterback camps. Now, he was the guy who stood on the sideline with a backwards camouflage hat. Aside from mop-up duty in a lopsided season-opening win over Texas, the only time he got onto the field was on field-goal attempts; Kizer was Notre Dame’s holder.
In Week 2, the Fighting Irish were on the road in Virginia when starting quarterback Malik Zaire broke his ankle late in the third quarter. Kizer had already thrown his first collegiate touchdown pass that day, a shovel pass on a fake-field goal. The second TD pass would prove to be a harbinger of the next calendar year.
He had been thrust into action as Notre Dame tried to survive in Charlottesville, where two fourth-quarter TDs had given UVa a one-point lead with less than two minutes to go. The drive started at Notre Dame’s 20, and Kizer converted a fourth-and-2 on the first set of downs before taking the Irish into long-field goal range, at the UVa 39 with 19 seconds left. With pressure from the left side coming at him, he had to slide back and couldn’t fully step into the throw. Still, he arched a perfect pass to a streaking Will Fuller down the left sideline, the receiver hauling it in as he crossed the goal line.
“I’m watching that play,” says former Notre Dame quarterback Carlyle Holiday. “And I know right away. Here’s the guy. Here’s the next great Notre Dame quarterback.”
Adds Tony Rice, another member of the ND QB fraternity: “You knew right then.”
And Rick Mirer, the only Notre Dame quarterback to be selected in the draft’s top-five since the NFL-AFL merger: “The way he’s handled himself since that play makes you think he can succeed at the next level.”
Three weeks into the 2016 season Kizer, now a junior, has trampolined into the top tier of draft-eligible quarterbacks. He’s certainly at the top of the projected 2018 class, but also 2017 if he declares early. Scouts are seduced by Kizer’s size (6' 4", 230 pounds) and skill set: He can scramble, but is capable of functioning out of the pocket. He has a big arm, but also displays impressive touch and timing on his throws. His glittery statistics—in 16 career games: 3,599 passing yards, 63.0% completions, 8.69 yards per attempt, 30 TD passes and another 14 as a runner, 12 interceptions—are bolstered by something one evaluator could only describe as “the ‘it’ factor.” The 20-year-old has poise. Notre Dame fell out of the playoff discussion with its second loss of the season on Saturday, a dud against Michigan State, but Kizer alone kept the Irish afloat. The final score was 36-28, thanks to a spirited second-half comeback led by Kizer, who finished with 344 passing yards and four total touchdowns.
“This kid is special,” says Brady Quinn, Notre Dame’s most recent first-round QB (2007, 22nd overall to Cleveland). “You see a lot of natural athletes who play quarterback because they can throw the football and they’re fast and athletic and they can get a coach out of a bad call because they can scramble. DeShone can get out of the pocket and run, but he’s a natural passer. He can pass with different anticipations, different speeds.”
Jarious Jackson, a two-year starter at Notre Dame and now quarterbacks coach for the CFL’s Saskatchewan Roughriders, has been equally impressed: “He has great pocket presence, he moves around, he’s always ready to release the ball when guys are breaking, he gives them nice, catchable balls,” says Jackson, who spent parts of three seasons with the Denver Broncos (who selected him in the seventh round of the 2000 draft). “He’s a tough kid, and you can tell the other 10 guys on the field respond to him. I mean if you’re building a team, what other qualities would you want?”
Kizer’s resume seems flawless—but that’s not uncommon among Notre Dame quarterbacks. Since Joe Theismann and Joe Montana, seven Fighting Irish quarterbacks have been NFL draft picks, including three top-50 picks, but they have only one Pro Bowl season between them: Steve Beuerlein, a journeyman who was drafted in 1987 (fourth round, Raiders) and made the 1999 Pro Bowl with the Carolina Panthers, his fifth team. Is Kizer the one who will finally break through?
* * *
There’s a mystique about being the Notre Dame quarterback. There’s also a different kind of pressure specific only to South Bend.
Holiday, who ended up switching to wide receiver and played four seasons in the NFL: “There’s so much pressure outside just being a quarterback: pressure from alumni, pressure from student body, being on NBC every week. Not to mention going to class and being a student. It could be the same amount of pressure, maybe even more, than being an NFL quarterback.”
Rice: “Stress? It goes to a point where you pull your hair out. That’s why I’m bald-headed now. It seems like the whole world is looking at you. If you’re not producing, they’re just going to call for you to transfer or play another position.”
(Since Lou Holtz retired in 1996, 18 Notre Dame quarterbacks have either switched positions or transferred.)
Quinn, who played eight NFL seasons: “I mean, there were weekly press conferences at Notre Dame that had double the attendance of ones I had with the Browns.”
Mirer, who had a 12-year NFL career but never lived up to his billing as the second overall pick of the 1993 draft: “If you can survive the scrutiny that comes with the position [at Notre Dame], everything else feels normal and routine. The drama around big bowl games, opening day or any Saturday really, it was great preparation for scrutiny going into pre draft, the draft, and the NFL. Any media obligations after, were really no bigger than what you did in college.
“It seems like you know a lot about us [Notre Dame quarterbacks] by the time our college careers end because of the media exposure. Sometimes that’s good, sometimes not.”
Mirer would know. He perhaps best exemplifies the expectations bestowed upon Notre Dame quarterbacks when the going is good. Bill Walsh, who coached against Mirer while at Stanford, was not shy about comparing Mirer to Joe Montana. Four years after Mirer was selected by the Seahawks, he was traded to the Bears. He made three starts for Chicago in 1997, then six more with the Jets in ’99, and eight with the Raiders in 2003.
“When you’re on a team that expects to contend for a national championship every season, it’s a shock to be on a team that won two games the previous year,” Mirer reflects. “A lot of times you’re drafted high, you go to a team that’s not doing well. So it’s a culture shock that way, the belief in winning in some of those organizations isn’t anywhere close to what you’re used to.”
Though while Mirer, like Quinn and 2010 second-round flameout Jimmy Clausen, never became Montana, it’s hard to identify a common trait among the quarterbacks that led to their downfall. In recruiting, Notre Dame does not discriminate by region or style—quarterbacks have ranged from prototypical pocket guys to option QBs. Coaching staffs have cycled through. Most recently, in Charlie Weis’s pro-style system, the program groomed Quinn and then Clausen.
“I don’t really have a theory on why there are so many good Notre Dame quarterbacks who couldn’t find success in the NFL,” Mirer says. “Brady, he’s the guy that probably should have broken through. He’s as talented as any of us but it just shows you how hard it is. It’s a tough league, you have to fit into certain systems and sometimes it doesn't make sense.”
Quinn’s warning is even more explicit: “If DeShone goes to Cleveland next year, he’ll get a first-hand experience of very poor ownership and, unfortunately, a poor long-term and short-term vision of how to build success.”
Some time in the next year or two, Kizer will join an NFL team with all the attributes of a franchise quarterback. But ultimately, it fall on that team to mold him into the NFL’s first great quarterback to come out of South Bend since Joe Montana.

* * *





* * *





* * *
Western Michigan was paid a combined $1.6 million by Big Ten schools Northwestern and Illinois to be added to the schedule. WMU won both games.
 
* * *



* * *



Louisiana Tech WR Trent Taylor vs. Middle Tennessee CB Jeremy Cutrer
Georgia G Greg Pyke vs. Ole Miss DT D.J. Jones
Wisconsin DE Vince Beigel vs. Michigan State TE Josiah Price
LSU C Ethan Pocic vs. Auburn DT Montravius Adams


CEDAR FALLS, Iowa — The leading candidate to be the next Carson Wentz isn’t quite comfortable in his assumed role.
It’s Saturday night, and Montana quarterback Brady Gustafson just led his team to a 20-14 road upset of Northern Iowa in front of a crowd packed shoulder-to-shoulder at the UNI-Dome. Gustafson didn’t play great—14 for 30, 118 yards, scoreless in the second half—but he’s doing all the right things otherwise. He pats an opponents shoulder on the way off the field; he credits the defense in his post-game press conference. Now, he’s leaning his 6'7" frame against a cement hallway wall during an interview.
When I say his footwork looked far improved from a handful of plays I had seen on film, Gustafson turns to self-deprecation: “I mean, look at me,” he says, pointing to his size-15 feet. “I’m kind of a goofy guy, I’m kind of awkward. So yeah, I needed to work on my footwork, and I guess it’s getting there.”
On the Wentz comparisons, he is downright bashful: “It’s very humbling. I mean, I played against the dude, I talked to him a couple times, mostly in passing, but he’s just a phenomenal athlete and a phenomenal story. And O.K., I just want to reiterate: It’s very humbling.”
As for off-field interests? “I’m an O.K. golfer,” he says. “Just to give you a little bit of an idea, the best round ever I shot was a 76. And O.K., I don’t want to be that guy… but I did hit a hole-in-one before. Again, I’m not trying to be that guy. I’m really sorry.”
Over the next seven months, Gustafson is going to need to keep working on that footwork, and stop apologizing for his ascension: At the moment, he’s an intriguing, if not special, NFL prospect.
* * *
The leaders of the 2017 quarterback draft class are becoming defined. Clemson’s Deshaun Watson, the dual-threat playmaker, headlined the summer. Big-armed Brad Kaaya of Miami is considered the most ready to plug into an NFL system. And Notre Dame’s DeShone Kizer catapulted onto the scene after a dazzling first two weeks of the college season.
But ever since the Philadelphia Eagles traded up to select Wentz, of FCS North Dakota State, with the number two pick of last April’s draft, the question has remained: Could another top prospect be hiding at a small school? This was only amplified after Wentz’s solid Week 1 performance.
Perhaps that’s why so many NFL teams are considering Montana’s Gustafson, a fifth-year senior. One NFL scout called him the best quarterback in the West. Another scout had major hesitations, citing Gustafson’s uneven footwork and inconsistency. If you’re wondering how NFL teams unearth a player like this, consider: One scout discovered Gustafson during the last draft cycle—while evaluating Wentz. The scout wanted to watch the one game North Dakota State lost last season. In doing so, he was captivated by the opposing quarterback: Gustafson.
The Billings, Mont., native looks the part. His tall frame is filled out by a thick, muscular body. One evaluator said Gustafson is like Sean Mannion, but with a stronger arm. Gustafson’s arm is impressive; during warmups I watched him throw tight, beautiful spiral after tight, beautiful spiral. In the game, the ball zipped out of his hand. And the parallels to Wentz are eerie. They’re both high honors students. They both played for FCS schools a bit off the beaten college football track. Gustafson—like Wentz—missed time with a significant injury his junior season. (For Gustafson, it was six weeks with a broken leg.) Last season was his first year as a starter, and Gustafson could enter the NFL with fewer than 20 career starts at the collegiate level.
Gustafson is a sub-60 percent passer (57.5 percent this year, 57.2 career), but he has been victimized by a lot of drops. The game I saw felt like a microcosm of his inconsistencies: He flashed on a couple beautiful plays, including a pump fake and gorgeous 30-yard touch pass (his wideout bobbled the ball) and a deep out from the far hash for an 11-yard gain on third-and-10 in the fourth quarter. He also had a hard time drawing the safety away with his eyes (“this is the last part of his game that needs perfecting,” says Grizzlies coach Bob Stitt) and had a few flat-footed throws, as well as one where he short-armed a ball that one-hopped a wide-open receiver.
All of those aspects of his game can be developed. Raw talent cannot.
* * *
Gustafson began playing flag football when he was eight. He was six inches taller than any other teammate, so he began on the offensive line. He was a prep standout for Billings West High as a quarterback, but he had only one scholarship offer: Montana. This is the first red flag for NFL teams. If they are going to take a chance on an unseasoned product, they at least want to have the assurance of pedigree. (Think Jets 2016 second-round pick Christian Hackenberg, who had a rocky career at Penn State but was a five-star recruit in high school.)
Gustafson rarely played during his first three seasons at Montana. Then Stitt took over in 2015. The longtime coach at Colorado School of Mines is a star among connoisseurs of offense (his brush with relative fame came after designing a shotgun fly-sweep play used by West Virginia’s Dana Holgorsen in the Mountaineers’ blowout of Clemson in the 2012 Orange Bowl). Stitt had retained three coaches from the previous staff, which was trying to push Gustafson out of the program. “The O-line was in such terrible shape, they had a quarterback who was a runaround guy, they needed someone who could scramble around.” Two days into the job, Stitt got a visit from Gustafson in his office. “I just want to let you know, coach,” he said, “I’m not going anywhere.” A day later, in the first quarterbacks meeting, Stitt agreed. “Brady just got it,” the coach says. “He was the only one who could pick up what we were doing.” Gustafson beat out six other quarterbacks to win the job going into 2015. He won the job again in 2016, beating out Kentucky transfer Reese Phillips.
Stitt’s offense asks a lot of the quarterback; on one run play, for example, Gustafson has 14 checks he can go to. It’s a hurry-up offense. Gustafson often goes to the sideline for the play call—meaning he has pre-determined reads—but he called several audibles in the Northern Iowa game.
Stitt vouches for his quarterback.
Coachable? “I can give him the worst call in the world and he’ll say, ‘I love it, I love it, let’s try it.’”
Tough? “Our O-line struggled. He took shots last year in our first couple games, and he was hurting. There was one shot in the midsection at NDSU. But he never said a word. I said, ‘Brady, you O.K.?’ Yeah coach, I’m fine.’… Even when he came back, the last few games, he wasn’t feeling great. He kind of told me after the fact. His leg still didn’t feel good, but he played anyway.” (After Gustafson returned to the lineup, Montana scored 57 and 54 points, respectively, in the final two games of the regular season.)
Able to handle pressure? “All summer he heard, ‘Next Carson Wentz, next Carson Wentz, and in our first game he tried to be perfect—he tried to be Carson Wentz. But he was able to adjust at halftime, and then he was Brady Gustafson, and he had a heck of a game.”
His potential is exciting. But at the same point in their respective careers, Wentz was far more polished. Gustafson has the tools, but because of his inconsistent mechanics, he’s considered a project. And teams are increasingly impatient with quarterbacks taken toward the top of the draft.
So is Brady Gustafson the next Carson Wentz? Probably not. But because of Wentz, a prospect like Gustafson is going to get a long look.

* * *

“Carl is very strong, very productive, and very, very technically sound. He came in as a freshman and was ready to play right away. He had only a few things he needed to learn, but the talent was there. Of course, he had a few vets above him, like me, but he was always a force. I’ll never forget his first sack, his freshman year against Ole Miss, it was beautiful. He’s been hurt just about every season, and he might have even played through some things. But I feel like this is the year. If he’s fully healthy, the sky is the limit for him. I’ve been in this league a few years now and I know what type of players can be impact players. Carl is that guy. I love him to death. That guy, he has a chance to be really special. He might even be better than me.”
* * *





* * *




* * *
For the first time since 1996, Air Force, Army and Navy have all started the season 2-0. Navy and Army have each overcome in-game challenges. In Week 1 Navy pulled an emergency quarterback from the stands after their starter went down. And in Week 2, the start of the second quarter of the Army-Rice game was delayed several minutes after one of Army’s mules pooped in the end zone. All eyes on you, Air Force, in your Week 3 game against Utah State.

* * *




* * *



KERRVILLE, Texas — For 73 days last spring, Johnny Manziel woke up atop a mountain. In evergreen-thick acres of pastoral Pennsylvania, Manziel was, for the first time in his life, secluded.
The Browns quarterback had entered Caron Treatment Center for undisclosed issues, and when he was discharged in April—just in time for the first offseason workout of 2015—those around him saw a different Manziel. He was more focused, especially when it came to football. The Browns training staff noted that he looked less bloated. His skin was even glowing.
For his second season in Cleveland, Manziel did not renew his lease on an apartment at The 9, the swanky downtown high-rise bustling with young professional athletes and boasting its own rooftop lounge. Instead he rented a house 25 minutes away, in the suburbs. Manziel also reintegrated into the NFL by adding structure, asking his high school offensive coordinator, 55-year-old Julius Scott, to move in as something of a life coach.
With a post-rehab glow and Scott at the helm, coaches noticed Manziel was studying the playbook more. Teammates noticed he was drinking less. By July, coaches and friends had the sense that Manziel had his life under control.
By the end of the summer, Scott had been dismissed. By midseason, the quarterback had fallen back into old habits. It’s a familiar pattern: Manziel straddles the line between becoming the professional football player many believe he can be, and the kid from Kerrville who can’t help but sabotage himself.
Manziel’s career has plunged to new depths after another year of off-field recklessness. Just 22 months after drafting him as their presumed franchise quarterback, the Browns have officially moved on, cutting Manziel last Friday. (His final stat line in Cleveland: 14 games, 57.0 percent completion rate, seven touchdowns, seven interceptions, seven fumbles.) An accusation of an ugly assault hangs over him; according to an affidavit, ex-girlfriend Colleen Crowley said that on Jan. 30 Manziel struck her so hard her eardrum ruptured. A Dallas grand jury is contemplating an assault charge.
He has been dropped by his agent, Erik Burkhardt, and his marketing team. As recently as early January, league sources say at least two teams—one being the Cowboys—had legitimate interest in Manziel. That was before the alleged assault on Crowley. Now, those same sources say that unless Manziel seeks treatment, he’s “untouchable.” His actions since Crowley’s accusations surfaced—chugging bottles at nightclubs from Miami to West Hollywood, dancing at a strip club—demonstrate such apparent disregard, it raises the question: If he never plays football again, does he even care?
Neither Manziel nor his parents responded to multiple requests for comment. Denise Michaels, Manziel’s publicist, also declined an interview request on Manziel’s behalf. Family lawyer Brad Beckworth said he had “no comment or interest in discussing the matter.” But many who have spent time in Manziel’s inner circle agreed to speak to The MMQB, believing it was important to accurately depict the tale of the Manziel conundrum. Each person interviewed—Browns and Texas A&M coaches and teammates, close friends, family friends and lawyers—expressed frustration with Manziel, sharing stories that depicted a lack of commitment and a culture of enablement. They all wondered where it went wrong. They also wonder what else could have possibly been done to save Manziel from himself. As one of his former coaches says: “When he had LeBron James as a mentor, texting him all the time, hanging out at his house watching football, and Johnny didn’t listen to his advice? That’s when I knew he had a problem.”
Over the years, Manziel has gravitated toward trouble. “The thing is,” says Steven Brant, one of Manziel’s best friends from high school, “we’ve been through so much. But no matter what happens, we always seem to figure it out. He always seems to end up OK.”
This time might be different. According to the Dallas Morning News, Manziel’s father, Paul, tried getting his son to enter a rehab facility in January, shortly after Johnny’s 23rd birthday. When his son refused, Paul Manziel told the paper: “I truly believe if they can’t get him help, he won’t live to see his 24th birthday.”
* * *

Such movie nights are not uncommon for Manziel. Those close to him describe patches when the quarterback “wants to get right.” He will re-commit himself to football, sequester himself from the spotlight and, when he has free time, binge on DVDs.
Whether this was such a spell or not, friends thought nothing of Manziel sleeping well into the New Year. Three days later, on the eve of Cleveland’s finale for another lost season, he vanished. Several people, including Cleveland coaches, called him repeatedly, each time reaching his voicemail. Manziel, it turns out, was in Las Vegas, sporting a blonde wig, glued-on mustache and hoodie while telling people his name was “Billy.”

“The moment he saw that video on Twitter,” a friend says, “His reaction was literally, ‘F---!’ He knew he screwed up. He knew he shouldn’t have done that.” But even before that week, Manziel’s tenure in Cleveland was already doomed.
* * *
It was Week 2, early enough in the year that optimism in Cleveland—however sparse—was still intact. And it was the rare Sunday afternoon with the nation’s eyes trained on FirstEnergy Stadium. The visiting quarterback, Titans rookie Marcus Mariota, had had a dazzling debut one week earlier, and the football world was eager to see his encore performance. But this day would belong to the Heisman winner on the home sideline.
When Josh McCown was concussed in the Browns’ season opener against the Jets, Manziel came off the bench and provided the kind of erratic play that plagued his rookie season a year earlier. However, on this Sunday, Manziel exuded an electricity that evoked his Texas A&M career. On Cleveland’s second offensive snap, he connected with speedy wideout Travis Benjamin for a 60-yard touchdown. But the reason for America’s fascination with Manziel could be distilled down to one play, his last of the game. With three minutes remaining and the Browns up 21-14, Manziel lined up in the shotgun. Titans linebacker Brian Orakpo came free off the edge, triggering Cleveland’s scramble drill: Receivers abandoned routes and raced for open field. Manziel spun to his left, ran for the sideline and launched a long spiral. On-target, again; Travis Benjamin, again, this time for a 50-yard score to seal the victory. The Dawg Pound was whipped into a frenzy. Manziel, arms outstretched, sprinted downfield in celebration. The moment seemed to usher in a new era of Cleveland Browns football.
Pettine later called the play “vintage Manziel.” On the sideline, offensive coordinator John DeFilippo deadpanned: “Coaching is overrated.” Even his staunchest critics melted: ESPN analyst Merril Hoge reversed his longstanding reluctance to embrace Manziel, declaring him the Browns starter “without question.”
More importantly, Manziel believed the starting job was his. But when he arrived at the team facility on Wednesday, McCown had cleared concussion protocol, and Pettine issued unwavering support for the 14-year journeyman. According to sources, Manziel was incredulous. He was a first-round pick and had just led the Browns to their first win in 10 months. He had also done everything the Browns had asked of him the previous offseason—the rehab, the move to the suburbs, less drinking.

Perhaps the coming months would have played out differently if Scott had still been in Manziel’s life. He was one of the first people Manziel thanked in his Heisman speech. Scott was the coach who was unafraid to grab Manziel’s face mask and berate him for showboating. At the same time, Scott never left a conversation with Manziel without telling him he loved him. He had abruptly resigned from his job at a Texas high school for the chance to help Manziel get straight.
The plan had been for Scott to stay with Manziel through the 2015 season, an arrangement similar to that of MLB slugger Josh Hamilton and his personal handler, Shayne Kelley. Manziel offered Scott some financial compensation; Scott offered steadying companionship. Scott took his job seriously; friends say Manziel eventually found his presence overbearing. By training camp, Scott had gone back to Texas. (Scott declined a request to comment for this story.) Crowley moved in with Manziel soon after.
With no support system in place, the benching was a tipping point. Browns sources say this instigated Manziel’s downward spiral. Friends too, noticed that Manziel was disengaged after the Titans game, though they saw him regroup a few more times during the season. Before the Steelers game in Week 10, for example, Manziel was acting with confidence, as Pettine had just tapped him as the starter for a second consecutive game.
“If Johnny doesn’t have a carrot dangling in front of him, he resorts to his default,” says a friend. “And his default is not giving a s---.”
But the Tennessee game would prove to be one of the few highlights of Manziel’s Cleveland tenure. When reinserted as the starter for an injured McCown later in the year, Manziel was ineffective save for the occasional improvisational play.
He wanted to party again, so he did, often showing up late to the facility for meetings and, according to a Browns source, sometimes sleeping off hangovers in the back of equipment rooms. In October there was a police dash-cam video of an argument between Manziel and Crowley during which Crowley claimed that she had been hit “a couple of times” (she did not press charges, and the NFL did not impose discipline), there was the bye-week partying in Austin, there was “Billy Vegas,” and finally—and most seriously—there was the assault accusation levied by Crowley in January.
* * *
No Cleveland resident under the age of 50 has seen a hometown team win a championship in a major professional sports league, and the hapless Browns have been plagued by an especially cruel mix of heartbreak and dysfunction.
Manziel’s arrival in the spring of 2014 was reason enough to celebrate. In the 12 hours after the draft, the Browns sold more than 1,500 season tickets. The team began asking fans to register online to attend training camp. In July of that year, Manziel led the league in jersey sales.
But in hindsight, it’s fair to ask: Did the Cleveland Browns ever really want Johnny Manziel?
After an extended draft-night wait in the green room, Manziel—selected 22nd, Cleveland’s second pick of the first round—had taken the stage, flashed the money sign and stoked the Browns’ fan base. Afterward, the quarterback was scooped up in a car at Radio City Music Hall and escorted to a private party: no media, no fanfare, just close friends. Along the way, he, childhood friends Brant, Deron Belford and his old coach, Scott, made a pit stop at a Lids store in Midtown. They bought every piece of Browns merchandise in the shop.
While Manziel and fans celebrated, one Browns assistant says the coaching staff was less thrilled with a selection that had seemingly come down from ownership.
“Johnny never really felt like the coaches wanted him there,” a close friend says.
That feeling became more defined as the season wore on. Manziel had never had a playbook before he entered the NFL—Texas A&M issued its players weekly game plans—and he barely studied it. He struggled through weekly quarterback tests. At practice, the offense would run a set of 10 scripted plays, with Manziel (as the No. 2 QB) running two of them. He would brush up on those two plays, and only those two plays.
“[So] when he was thrust into [the starter’s] role, it became very clear he had no idea what was going on,” says a former Browns coach. “He went out there and had no clue.”
When incumbent starter Brian Hoyer was injured and Manziel was asked to do more, he’d often blank. Offensive coordinator Kyle Shanahan—a “system first, players second” coach—simplified his packages for Manziel so much, one Browns source says, “you or I could have lined up under center.”
Manziel was often detached at practice. On an especially cool afternoon, he remarked: “I bet it’s nice in Dallas right now.” That irked many in the organization, including some teammates, though he was never unpopular in the locker room. Far from it. Many players seemed to gravitate towards Manziel because he was charming and cool. Manziel is loyal, picking up the tab anytime a friend visited Cleveland, buying friends Rolex watches “just because” or taking time to engage in conversation with a teammate’s or coach’s kids who were fans. If he didn’t like someone, he let it be known.
“That’s the thing most people don’t understand about Johnny,” a Browns source says. “His teammates all love him, and stand up for him.”

Manziel’s behavior in Cleveland was similar to his behavior at Texas A&M. He would stay in the film room for extra hours if the Aggies had a tough opponent, but if he was confident the Aggies would win, he would leave after the final whistle of practice. He was always in a class of his own.
A popular story in College Station is of an informal summer practice after his Heisman season. The summer was a whirlwind of meet-and-greets and rubbing shoulders with A-listers for Manziel, who arrived to a session late. The moment he got there, he was mobbed by teammates who were excited to see him. Manziel jumped right into the 7 v. 7 drill, in the jeans he was wearing when he arrived, and led his team on a touchdown drive.
* * *
Johnny Manziel’s introduction to the college football world came by way of a shirtless booking photo. On the morning of July 29, 2012, Manziel woke up in a jail cell. Hours earlier, he and Brant were at a College Station bar. According to a police report, Brant said something that was taken by an African-American patron as a racial slur. Manziel tried to make peace, but according to the report he too was drunk, and began fighting with the man in what the report described as “mutual combat.” The police report notes Manziel “appeared to be so intoxicated he could not answer my questions about the incident except to tell me he wanted a ride home and was sorry.” He also showed police a fake ID. He was charged with disorderly conduct, failure to identify himself and possessing a false identification card.

It was a big deal to Kevin Sumlin, who had just taken the reins as the Aggies’ coach. Manziel’s parents convened for a series of meetings. The coach created a checklist for Manziel if he wanted to be a starter: community service, meet with a counselor, extra running and no partying. Manziel’s parents hired an attorney for the three misdemeanor charges (the disorderly conduct and false ID charges were dropped; Manziel pleaded guilty for failure to properly identify himself).
But five weeks later, Manziel heard from the school’s disciplinary board; he had been placed on “conduct probation,” which would include a ban from intercollegiate athletics from a semester (in this case, the 2012 football season). According to a source, Manziel was livid. Much as how he felt in the wake of that Titans victory three years later, he felt he had done everything asked of him.
As Manziel appealed the suspension, he began looking into junior colleges; if Texas A&M wouldn’t let him play, he would transfer. Sumlin wrote a letter to school officials vouching that Manziel had already faced punishment. On Aug. 14, the dean of student life overturned Manziel’s suspension. On Aug. 15, he was named Texas A&M’s starting quarterback.
Within three months, Manziel’s world was turned upside-down. On Nov. 10, he led A&M to a shocking upset over top-ranked Alabama, in Tuscaloosa. When he returned to campus, Manziel had police escort him to class because he could barely walk a block without classmates stopping him. He had become the cult hero that had been missing from the college football landscape since Tim Tebow’s graduation. Except that Tebow’s ascent was more gradual—he was a prized recruit and saw part-time action as a freshman—and didn’t occur in the age of Twitter and Instagram.
Manziel-mania had arrived at the perfect time for Texas A&M, which was in the midst of a transformation, introducing itself to the SEC and undergoing a massive stadium renovation. On the field, Manziel flourished in chaos, extending plays and using his slight frame to evade defenders all over the field. “In a lot of ways, he was the anti-Texas A&M personality,” says Jason Cook, the Senior Associate Athletic Director who was directly involved with all marketing campaigns in 2013. “The university has always been known as tradition-rich and conservative. Johnny was flashy, he was confident, he was unpredictable. That’s something that attracted both Aggies and non-Aggies.”
A&M was flooded with phone calls not only from Sports Illustrated and ESPN, but from People Magazine and TMZ. The athletic department huddled for a strategy: They would assign one staffer whose sole responsibility was to handle all Manziel-related media requests. Part of the intrigue grew from a mystique: During Manziel’s Heisman season, Sumlin would not relent on his policy to bar first-year players from speaking to the media. Meanwhile, the university reaped $740 million in pledges and gifts in 2013, an all-time record for a public university.

The next summer, when allegations arose that Manziel had accepted money from a broker in exchange for autographs, an NCAA violation, his punishment netted out to a half-game suspension in the season opener against Rice. The Aggies led by seven at halftime; it took Manziel just 20 minutes of game time to stretch that lead to 24. And he flaunted it, celebrating touchdowns by miming an autograph and gesturing his now-famous money sign. He wasn’t benched until picking up a 15-yard taunting penalty in the fourth quarter, with the game out of reach.
The message was clear: Manziel was untouchable.
* * *
Manziel grew up in an affluent family, enriched for generations by the oil industry. When he was in seventh grade, the family moved from East Texas to Kerrville, 100 miles northwest of San Antonio. Tucked in the hills, it’s is a small town that welcomes placidity, seducing retirees with two museums, a folk festival and a tendency to pour tax dollars into golf courses. The status quo was interrupted in the summer of 2011, when one of the high school’s star athletes, Deron Belford, was indicted on three charges related to two separate accusations of sexual assault.
“Charges like this in a town like Kerrville?” says Mark Stevens, Belford’s attorney. “You bet this was a big case around here.” Belford, then 18, was one month away from enrolling at Texas State on a basketball scholarship. He pleaded not guilty to all three charges, but TSU revoked the offer (Belford, an all-state point guard, would never play college basketball).
According to Kerr County court documents, he was charged with sexually assaulting two females at two different parties, in 2010 and 2011. (The accusers each came forward months after the incidents occurred.) The Kerr County District Court tried the cases separately. The first trial began in April 2012. The 12-member jury was all female. The victim testified, describing how at a group get-together, her friends peeled off in pairs, of how she and Belford were alone in the back seat of his car, and how he forced himself on her.
Then the defense called in its star witness, and those in the courtroom that day recall an audible gasp when his name was announced: skyping from his College Station dorm room, Johnny Manziel.
The quarterback had only enrolled at Texas A&M that January, but he was legendary in Kerrville—during his senior year, his dazzling play attracted such crowds that school officials had to arrange shuttles from the mall parking lots for games. Manziel missed several quarterback meetings to skype with attorneys before the court date, which barely registered a pulse in Aggieland. The party where one alleged incident occurred was at Manziel’s parents’ house, and Belford was one of Manziel’s best friends; besides playing basketball, Belford was a standout wide receiver. Even still, the defense was somewhat surprised that Manziel agreed to participate, testifying for roughly 20 minutes while he was 200 miles away.
The jury entered deliberations the next day, and after just hours found Belford not guilty.
Belford wept when he heard the verdict. The second trial, scheduled for June and covering two charges, never happened: Belford entered a plea bargain after the district attorney reduced the two charges to one charge of simple assault. “He was able to move on with his life,” Stevens said. Until it unspooled again.
In 2013, after Manziel won the Heisman Trophy, he was feted in Kerrville. A ceremony in town was followed by a house party. Manziel, his parents, his friends and their parents attended, and alcohol flowed freely. Belford was drinking a Coors Light when a guest approached him: Keith Williams, a judge in town. “You’re not supposed to be drinking that,” the judge said.
A few weeks later Belford began a 131-day prison sentence for violating his probation. He also lost any chance of ever playing college basketball, all because he couldn’t resist grabbing a beer. For a young star athlete like Manziel who himself had been arrested less than a year earlier, his friend’s case would seem to be a pointed cautionary tale. Considering Manziel’s current predicament, he apparently never saw it that way.
* * *
Those in the Browns organization believed that perhaps Julius Scott would have been able to keep Manziel focused and peel him away from a lingering entourage from Texas. Manziel is rarely alone. Friends say his call and FaceTime logs can reach double-digits by mid-afternoon. If he’s not around friends, he’s talking to them. Manziel’s own marketing team had tried to separate the quarterback from this group. On several occasions, they plopped the quarterback in front of a white board, mapping out the times he got in trouble and the people he was with when those incidents occurred.
Upon news of his release on Friday, his publicist released a statement on Manziel’s behalf:
“I’d like to thank the Browns for the opportunity they gave me—nearly two years ago, we all hoped that we were building what could be a championship team in Cleveland. I will always remember the support I received from the organization, my teammates and especially the fans.”
Some friends at Texas A&M wonder how Manziel’s life could have been different if he had stayed an extra year and worked through maturity issues in the confines of college.
People from Kerrville still speak glowingly of Manziel, and the excitement he brought to Tivy High, though visiting the town is a stark reminder that life moves on. In early February, storefronts were decorated with posters congratulating quarterback Cade Dyal, Tivy’s new leader in career touchdown passes.

And that might be the scariest thing: No one is sure when things will get better for Johnny Manziel, but most everyone seems resigned to the fact that things are going to get worse.

INDIANAPOLIS — Three weeks after his Panthers lost in Super Bowl 50, Greg Olsen has swapped his jersey for a charcoal suit. The mountain-man beard and unkempt look he saw through the 2015 season has also been replaced by a clean shave and gelled hair. Against a backdrop of NFL prospects trying to catch a team’s eye, the All-Pro tight end walks through the bowels of Lucas Oil Stadium with a purposeful stride, intent on acing his own job interview of sorts.
Nine years after the Bears drafted him in the first round, Olsen has returned to the combine to make his debut as an NFL Network analyst. “Do you know exactly what time I’ll be on?” he says on the final Saturday in February, barely slowing down. “My dad is blowing up my phone. I think he’s kind of excited for this.”
The league’s so-called Underwear Olympics provide an annual opportunity to tryout the next crop of players, but the combine has also become a must-attend networking event for nearly 2,000 NFL personnel-types, 1,000 media members, 800 agents, countless marketing representatives and current players thinking about a career beyond the field.
Olsen flew in for two days to shake hands, exchange contact info and sharpen his on-air skills. “I’ve always been a guy who didn’t mind speaking to reporters,” says Olsen, who still has a few years left in pads and a helmet (he’ll be 33 when his contract expires after the 2018 season). “Being in the media is one of those things that so many guys say they’d like to do after they play. But you need to actually try a few different avenues to see if you like it—or if you’d be good at it.”
At noon, Olsen met with NFL Network talent producer Marcus Smith to get a rundown of the day. First, Olsen will spend an hour in a luxury suite with ESPN analyst Merril Hoge, Colts tight end Dwayne Allen and nearly two dozen fans as part of a meet-and-greet. Then, if he’s amenable, an interview for an upcoming special on his former teammate, Matt Forte. “Oh I’d love to,” Olsen says. “He’s one of my best friends.” After that, Olsen will go to the field to report during tight end drills and then do a live segment with NFL Network anchors Bucky Brooks and Matt Smith.
“Do you guys want me to wear this suit on the field?” he asks.
“Actually, we have a polo for you to wear,” Smith says. “Figured you’d be more comfortable.”
“Now that is the best news I’ve heard all day.”
* * *
The night before, Greg Olsen dined with Merril Hoge at the Capitol Grille and then sat courtside as the Pacers hosted the Hornets, trying to soak up as much as possible from his mentor. A 10th-round pick of the Steelers in 1987, Hoge’s football career was derailed by injury after his seventh season. In 1996, the running back joined the crew at ESPN. His second career, the 51-year-old Hoge says, “began with Chuck Noll.”
The Steelers’ Hall of Fame coach famously lectured players about finding their “life’s work” beyond football, repeating a variation of the same speech three times a year: once during training camp (before some would soon be cut), during the season (usually after a tough loss) and as the team cleared out their lockers. “Don’t waste your offseason,” Noll would say. “Use it to explore what you want to do with your life, so you have a life’s purpose.”
Hoge heeded that advice and took a job selling insurance one summer. He reported to a nondescript office park, settled into his cramped cubicle and soon determined “this is not for me.”

A year later, the Pittsburgh radio station B-94 asked Hoge to call in during the season and do interviews. At the time, he was the first active player to have a regular radio spot. Hoge enjoyed the freedom to explain certain plays in depth and educate fans on how the offense really unfolded. The following year, Hoge was approached by DVE, a competing station that offered him $15,000 a year to be on air.
There had to be a catch, Hoge figured, and there was: He had to be at the station every Monday at 7 a.m. “But once I walked into the studio, that was it,” Hoge says. “I loved the energy, I loved everything about it. Just like Coach Noll said, I saw an opportunity, and I took advantage.”
When Hoge signed with Chicago in free agency in 1994, he kept the spot on DVE—and has kept his call-in spot to this day.
“That’s fantastic,” Olsen says. “I love that.”

“I just love information,” says Olsen, a self-described news-junkie who patrols Twitter for stories on topics as varied as football and entrepreneurship. To prepare for his NFL Network spot, Olsen memorized statistics and characteristics of the tight end prospects. It wasn’t taxing work; he follows college football and has a strong foundation of knowledge. When Hoge mentions that his son, Beau, is a quarterback at BYU, Olsen rattles off the names of the last four Cougars QBs without any hesitation. Olsen is most concerned about avoiding clichés while on TV. “That’s a guy with upside, that’s a guy who needs to keep his head on straight,” Olsen says. “If you catch me saying either of those sayings…”
* * *
Olsen has a favorite story about his own combine experience in 2007. The New Jersey native interviewed with the Jets, and head coach Eric Mangini introduced him to nearly 30 team employees in the room. When Olsen finally sat down, Mangini pointed to a man in the corner.
“What’s that guy’s name?” the coach asked.
“Uh,” Olsen stammered. “I don’t know, sir.”
“And that guy?”
“I don’t know, sir.”
Olsen ended up correctly identifying just one person.
“And that’s because I knew his son,” Olsen says. “That interview was the perfect illustration of what the combine is. It’s about creating stressful situations and then stripping it all away to figure out if a guy is mentally capable of performing at the next level— and then if he’s physically capable.”

At the meet and greet on Saturday, Olsen works the room like a seasoned pro. Memphis quarterback Paxton Lynch can be seen landing his 36-inch vertical leap on six televisions in the room, but Olsen is completely focused on the fans. He becomes animated when answering a question about Cam Newton, throwing his arm over Dwayne Allen’s shoulder: “How much do you weigh?”
“Uh,” Allen chuckles. “It is the offseason… but 265.”
“And I’m 255,” Olsen tells the group. “So imagine Cam’s body as right in the middle of us. He’s 260, runs a 4.5 and can do things no other quarterback can do. Now, you can find quarterbacks who can win in other ways. But teams need to stop looking for another Cam, because really, there is nobody else like him out there.”
After signing a few autographs, Olsen is off to film the interview about Matt Forte. But first, a pit stop. Olsen pokes his head into the suite where Panthers coach Ron Rivera is evaluating prospects. “Hey, find us some players, why don’t you!” he says.
Olsen is then escorted into a storage room that has been turned into a makeshift studio. Even though he wasn’t given much time to prepare, Olsen answers every question about Forte with personal detail and fluidity. “I remember when I first time I saw him at a workout,” Olsen says, “And my first impression: that’s a quiet, humble guy.” The word “um” is absent from Olsen’s vocabulary. “If only every interview was this easy,” a cameraman says as Olsen exits six minutes later.
“You just can’t overcomplicate things,” Olsen says. “Just speak to the viewer like you're speaking regularly.”
An hour later, Olsen is sitting on the field, telling Brooks and Smith about why a prospect might be nervous for combine drills: “You’re not used to the routes that they ask you to run, they’re laying out cones, which is not realistic.”
A half hour after that, Olsen is back in his suit, sitting amongst four other NFL Network analysts and offering a candid assessment of the 2016 group. “The routes I thought, for the most part, were OK,” he says. “You saw a lot of guys sometimes struggling to  track the balls in the over the shoulders … I would have liked to see [Arkansas tight end] Hunter Henry run. He came in as the clear cut No. 1 guy in the group. We’ll have to wait for his Pro Day.”
The experience, Olsen says, wasn’t drastically different than speaking to a scrum of reporters after a game.
“It was immediately evident he was taking this seriously and was prepared,” says Mike Muriano, the senior coordinating producer. “He was natural, comfortable and was himself, and I think that showed. In my opinion, he absolutely has a future in this if he wants to do it.”
“I enjoyed it,” Olsen says, with a qualifier: “I’m not ready to stop playing quite yet.”


SOUTH JORDAN, Utah — At Super Bowl Opening Night, a reporter asked Star Lotulelei the origin of his name. “I don’t know,” the Panthers’ defensive tackle stumbled. “I’m going to have to ask my father. I’m starting to get that question a lot. I just know my name is Star Jr.”
Star Lotulelei Sr. watched on television. He thought about texting his son. There is a story behind the name, and an important one. Maybe, he says, it is time to tell it.
Begin in Tonga. The nation of 100,000 (one-eighth the size of Charlotte) is composed of 177 islands in the South Pacific. Nearly 70 percent of Tongans reside on the largest island, but not the Lotuleleis, who lived on a landmass roughly the size of five football fields. There is not much industry in Tonga. You either work from the ocean or the land. The Lotuleleis harvested taro and tapioca, then sold the produce on the streets. They lived, like most around them, in a one-room hut constructed from coconut leaves and mud. 


Upon entering the home, visitors are greeted with one prominent piece: a framed certificate of Lotulelei Sr.’s Ph.D at BYU. “I put that there so all my children and grandchildren can see it,” he says. “And remind them of the opportunities that were never available to me back home.”
* * *
Dave Peck received a call that a promising player was transferring to South Jordan’s Bingham High in 2006. Imagine the football coach’s sly grin when Star Lotulelei Jr., 6-foot and massive, walked into his office. “Did I just win the lottery?” Peck says. 
Nearly 70 players tried out for the team that year; Peck allowed only two players to play both ways. Star Jr. was the centerpiece of the offensive and defensive lines. Division I schools were smitten, and Star Jr. chose BYU. When he was younger, his father used to bring home VHS tapes of the Cougars, and the Lotuleleis would huddle around a small TV and watch. But when it was time for Star Jr. to sign his official letter, the admissions department balked at his GPA.
BYU told Star Jr. they could work it out. Go to community college, get your grades up, and come to Provo a year later. Star Jr. declined. He told his parents he would quit football. “I think he was mad at himself, embarrassed,” his dad says. “The thing is, the love for the game was always secondary for Star. He was good enough, and he liked playing with his friends. But he didn’t have the passion for it … yet.”

Star Jr. took a job hauling furniture for $10 an hour. He was out of the house at 7 a.m., returned by 4 p.m. and despised every minute. This wasn’t exactly a surprise. When he was 10, Star Jr.'s parents secured their son a job delivering newspapers. “He would sit in the back of the van as his older sisters did all the work,” his mother, Pesatina, says. 
Two months into his furniture delivery job, Star quit. After work, he had been going to Bingham High and standing on the sideline to watch his younger brother Lowell practice. Star Jr. realized he missed the sport. He enrolled at Snow Community College and joined the team. 
* * *
Pesatina laughs when she is reminded that her son might be the only member of the Carolina Panthers who has yet to dab. It turns out Star Jr. is a great dancer. “And the dab,” Pesatina explains, “is very similar to a Tongan dance. But Star is sometimes shy of showing his personality.”
Star Jr. lived in Tonga for the first nine years of his life. His father had worked his way through schooling in Hawaii, studied accounting, and now was settling logistics to migrate his nine siblings and parents to the U.S. (which he eventually did). 
At first Star Jr.’s teachers were concerned about his behavior. “He never talks. Is he like this at home?” Pesatina remembers a grade-school teacher once saying. 
“No, he is comfortable at home,” she said. “That’s because he knows everybody.”
Truth is, Star Jr. is a homebody. When he enrolled at Snow College, it was his first time not sleeping under his parents’ roof. He called after a few days to say he was homesick; the Lotuleleis visited every weekend, bringing trays of Pesatina’s famous chicken thighs.

In year two at Snow, he met Fuiva, a volleyball player. Turns out, Star Sr. already knew Fuiva—he was friendly with her father in Tonga. “She comes from a good family,” Star Sr. told his son. “Be good to her.”
When Star Jr. earned a scholarship at Utah, transferring to play in Division I, he married Fuiva. Utah coaches asked Star Jr. to live on campus, but he opted for the basement of his parents’ house. At that point Fuiva and Star Jr. had their first child, a daughter Arilani. “He told me, ‘I know I need to work hard for her,’” Pesatina recalls.
Commuting to Utah wasn’t exactly easy, especially in football season. The hours were longer than shifts lifting couches, and the work more strenuous. Star Jr. would leave home at 4 a.m. to make a morning lift and would not return until 9 p.m. after classes and practice. When his name bubbled as a potential first-round pick if he left after junior year, Star Jr. thought about it carefully. “For a high percentage of us who migrated here, it’s enticing to make that kind of money and provide for your family,” Star Sr. says. “But he said he wanted to get closer to his degree, so he stayed.”
* * *
The morning that Star Jr. left to go to Indianapolis for the NFL combine, Pesatina had a bad feeling. Star Jr. was sniffly, and his throat a bit sore. I hope his cold heals, Pesatina thought. Later in the afternoon, Star Sr. received a call from his son’s agent. “Hey, Brother Lotulelei, what are you doing?’” the agent asked.
“I’m just at home,” he said.
“Good,” the agent said, and then instructed Star Sr. to sit down. The NFL doctors flagged his son’s physical. There was something wrong with his heart, but they did not know what. Pesatina sobbed through the night. She imagined Star Jr. alone in a hotel room worrying about Fuiva and Arilani. 
He stayed in Indianapolis for four days. He sat in meeting after meeting with NFL coaches and GMs, knowing some of these men might have already scratched him off their boards. He returned to Utah, where he took test after test, each doctor telling him, “We don’t know yet.” 

And then after one extra-long appointment at the University of Utah Hospital, Star Sr. received a text from his son: “It seems that I'm OK.”
The Lotuleleis were overjoyed. Star Jr. could participate at Utah’s Pro Day, which would turn out to be the most-attended in school history—and that doesn’t include the nearly 50 Lotuleleis who lined the facility, cheering for each of Star Jr.’s 38 reps in the 225-pound bench press (which would have placed him first among defensive linemen at the combine).
Although Star Jr. slipped from his projected top-5 ranking, he was selected in the first round by the Panthers, at No. 14.
* * *
Among Star Jr.’s first rookie splurges? A truck for his dad. Growing up, they drove a Plymouth that wouldn’t fit all of the Lotuleleis, forcing Star Jr. to share the floor with his brother. “I’ll buy you a truck once I make the NFL, dad,” Star Jr. promised.
Star Jr. made another splurge for the Super Bowl week. He paid to send his parents, Fuiva’s parents and his eight siblings (plus spouses) to Santa Clara. He insisted. 

After a game in Star Jr.’s rookie season, he took his parents to dinner, where they saw Ron Rivera and his wife. Rivera came over to the table to introduce himself. “We love having Star on the team,” the coach said. “He does his job, and he does it well.”
“I was so proud of him when I heard that,” Star Sr. says.
He had another reason to be proud last fall when Star Jr. and Fuiva had their third child, this time a son. The boy may not know the importance yet, but in time he undoubtedly will: His name is Star, the third.



The source for the most explosive allegations is Charlie Sly, a 31-year-old supplement salesman with pharmaceutical training whose conversations with Collins, some 27 hours’ worth according to Al Jazeera, were recording without Sly’s knowledge. During his discussions with Collins—the contents of which he later completely disavowed—Sly spoke at length about supplying PEDs to various NFL players, and about meeting and working with Peyton Manning at the Guyer Institute, an anti-aging clinic in Indianapolis, while Manning was recovering from neck surgery in 2011. Sly also claimed the Guyer Institute sent growth hormone to Manning’s wife, Ashley. Manning denied the allegations to Peter King of The MMQB and Chris Mortensen of ESPN, and a Manning spokesman told Al Jazeera the allegations were false, that Ashley’s medical history was a private matter and that “any medication shipped to her was prescribed by her doctor and taken solely by her.” Defending the Al Jazeera story afterward, reporter Deborah Davies said a second “very reliable” source confirmed to Al Jazeera that HGH shipments were sent to the Mannings’ home. On Wednesday of this week, Manning spokesman Ari Fleischer told The MMQB, “I believe the piece is irresponsible journalism that sought to smear Peyton Manning, as well as invade the privacy of Ashley Manning.”

“Charlie regrets that he created this storm,” Sly’s Indiana-based lawyer, Travis Cohron, told The MMQB earlier this month. “The documentary portrays him as a peddler of steroids, where it couldn’t be further [from] the truth. Also, he has never had any contact with any of the athletes as suggested. Charlie Sly has never met Peyton Manning. He has never worked with him. He has never worked with Ashley Manning. Maybe he has been in the same building as her, but he has no knowledge of what treatments she may or may not have had.”
Sly’s disavowal notwithstanding, the NFL says it has undertaken an “ongoing and comprehensive” investigation into the Al Jazeera story. The nature and extent of that probe remains unclear, however, and the NFL’s silence on the details has prompted criticism in light of the resources the league has expended on Deflategate, a controversy involving the only NFL star on a par with Manning.
Yet the cases are inherently different. The NFL faces significant hurdles in an investigation of Manning and the other players named by Al Jazeera. At the moment there appears to be no tangible evidence—documentation, legal proceedings, failed tests, etc.—of a policy violation. Moreover, the NFL has no power to compel key figures from the report such as Al Jazeera reporters, Guyer Institute workers or Sly to cooperate, and those figures may have little motivation to speak to the NFL. In Deflategate, important figures included Patriots employees who were contractually obligated to participate in the investigation.
The situation is similar to the one MLB faced in its handling of Alex Rodriguez and the Biogenesis scandal in 2013. MLB overcame the evidence hurdle in that case by suing Biogenesis for interfering with player contracts, a path that for now the NFL appears unlikely to pursue.
The league also lacks access to Sly’s personal records or those of the Guyer Institute, and it likely won’t get such access unless other authorities intervene. For example, when former Patriots safety Rodney Harrison was suspended by NFL for using HGH in 2007, it was after he was caught during a nationwide crackdown on internet drug sales. In that probe, the Albany County (N.Y) District Attorney’s office discovered Harrison’s name on an illegal prescription from a Florida clinic for HGH, which Harrison had purchased online. Whatever the NFL’s investigation involves, the likeliest scenario for uncovering evidence against players named by Al Jazeera is if the Drug Enforcement Agency, Food and Drug Administration or other authority were to investigate the Guyer Institute or Charlie Sly. Spokesmen for the FDA and DEA would not comment on whether such investigations were being pursued.
* * *
Absent that evidence, and given that Sly has recanted, the question is, how credible are the allegations he made before he was aware that he was being recorded? The program thrust Collins into the underbelly of sports doping as mole, portraying him as an aging British hurdler seeking one last shot at glory. According to Sly’s lawyer, Collins approached Sly with business opportunities abroad, and Sly was under the assumption that Collins could help grow his supplement business, rather than looking to buy steroids. Could Sly simply have been bragging, falsely, about knowing those players, to impress a potential client or investor? And yet for six days, including a series of road trips to Houston and Dallas, Sly spoke with apparent authority of specific athletes using performance-enhancing drugs.

Sly, meanwhile, has gone undercover himself. According to his lawyer, Al Jazeera has not been in contact with him since the piece aired on Dec. 26, and he has not spoken publicly since his YouTube video. That leaves Cohron to represent the man at the center of perhaps the biggest, and strangest, doping allegation the NFL has seen. “The last thing I’ll say,” says Cohron, “is that Charlie feels terrible about all of this. Never did little Charlie Sly ever imagine something he said in the back of a car would force Peyton Manning, of all people, to respond.”

PHILADELPHIA — The clock struck midnight, and the party commenced in the bowels of Lincoln Financial Field. Inside the musky visitor’s locker room, the men in grass-stained uniforms swarmed to a corner, jostling together as close as they could, and they began to dance. They swung their gray championship hats like props. They dialed the music louder and louder, they captured it on their iPhones. “Get that playoff check bab-y,” a voice in the middle wailed. 
“Nah,” shouted another. “Get that respect, bab-y.” The room roared.
On a dewey Saturday in December, the Redskins defeated the Eagles, 38–24, to capture the NFC East. Washington knocked out two rivals, the Giants and Eagles, with one swoosh, setting up a meaningless Week 17 game with Dallas— a situation Washington has become accustomed to for the better half of this century, only as the pitied participant.
It is a stunning ascent for a franchise that spent the off-season navigating turnover and tempering expectations; in August, first-year General Manager Scot McCloughan told Sirius Radio, “We’re not going to be the best team out there.” Before the season, Bovada listed Washington at 14–1 odds to win the division. On Saturday, McCloughan stood on the periphery of the locker room. His normally rosy cheeks were extra flushed, and after whispering a few words into receiver DeSean Jackson’s ear, walked to exit, muttering to himself, “Wow.”

Weaving through the room was one of three men to ever quarterback Washington to a Super Bowl. At 6’4”-and-bulky, 60-year-old Doug Williams wears a championship hat with navy jacket, khakis and leather briefcase. In his front office role, his touches over this roster are ubiquitous and undefined, but he knows what it takes to win. “You know what this team is?” says the MVP of Super Bowl XXII. “This is a team that’s peaking at the right time. This is a team that’s coming together at the right time. It feels so good to see a team like this.”
That begins with Cousins, who has become a folkish hero with his campy, “You Like That!?” outburst, but now has the stats to back it up. Prior to this season, Cousins had a 2–7 record as starter with a touchdown to interception ratio of 18–19.
Cousins has led the Redskins to a 4–1 record over their last five games, on Saturday turning his seventh 300-yard performance of the season with video-game like numbers (31-of-46 for 345 yards). He has thrown 20 touchdowns to only three interceptions over his last nine.
He threw four touchdowns on Saturday, including two to tight end Jordan Reed, a matchup nightmare and one of coach Jay Gruden’s favorite gadgets. Gruden lines Reed up in the backfield, out wide or as a h-back. In the case of his second touchdown, he went in motion to create a mismatch with linebacker Mychal Kendricks.

“We had the debacle at the end of the half,” Gruden says, “And a normal guy could have gone in the tank there. But [Cousins] kept his composure, just as he has all year.”
Just as the Redskins plowed forward to victory, the Eagles unraveled. Forty seven years ago, they booed Santa Claus here. Surely you have heard the tale of Frank Olivo, the Eagles season-ticket holder who squeezed into a $100 red suit and pasted on an itchy white beard for the finale of a drab 1968 season. With the halftime attraction stranded in New Jersey, organizers plucked Olivo from the stands. Fans pelted understudy Santa with snowballs and heckles, the defining anecdote of Philadelphia’s unsparing fanbase.
Olivo died in May at age 66. In the city’s first Christmas without its infamous scapegoat, those at Lincoln Financial Field on Saturday night paid homage. They booed their disgruntled former star, Jackson, and their disgruntled non-star, DeMarco Murray. They booed the officials, as is vogue, and their team’s six first-half offensive penalties, two fumbles, one dropped pass that would have been a touchdown and three more dropped passes that would have been first downs. 
The nightmare after Christmas encapsulated Philadelphia’s season of anguish: quarterback Sam Bradford couldn’t win his first meaningful game in five years and Chip Kelly’s splashy acquisitions were either ineffective (Murray), irrelevant (Kiko Alonso) or sidelined completely (Byron Maxwell). The moribund Eagles marched off after the loss to Washington with barely any fans remaining to boo.
Back in the Redskins locker room, one of McCloughan’s biggest free agent signings, defensive end Terrance Knighton, sat alone in his stall. As his teammates jumped around, the former Broncos team captain took stock of his new team’s fortune.
“This feels so different from my time in Denver,” Knighton says. “They brought in guys like me, Ricky [Jean-Francois] from winning organizations who could help change the culture. We had to work so hard. There were so many nay-sayers. Honestly, nobody thought we’d be able to do it. So there had to be a lot of belief in this locker room, and if not all of us believed it, there was no way we could be where we are now.”






​






































Last January, Derek Simpson, a personal injury lawyer based in Huntsville, Ala., received an unexpected phone call. Simpson had recently become certified as an NFL agent, and he had exactly one client at the time. So far that year he had watched as his client went undrafted, he helped the client sign a free-agent contract, and he celebrated as his player made a 53-man roster. Now, inexplicably, that player was on a team that was competing in the Super Bowl. “It was a year of firsts,” says Simpson. “But then someone called and asked if my client would agree to be in a commercial if he happened to play well in the big game.”
Simpson laughed. His client was a reserve cornerback, a once-cut JUCO player who two years earlier was working a $7.25-an-hour job at Popeyes. Right. Like he would be the star of Super Bowl XLIX.
















































The funny thing about it is, I’ve never met any of the players that I’ve done the commercial for. They're there on the field, and I’m in a studio in Michigan.






“The tube is filled with shear-thickening fluid, a liquid that can stop a bullet in its tracks.”
Perhaps this sounds like a line a lab technician would deliver in James Cameron’s next futuristic flick, or the setup for a daring David Copperfield act. Or maybe it’s the description for a component in … football equipment? In 50 years, that might not seem so far-fetched.
The future of football equipment lies in technological advances offering players even further protection without hindering their performance. By Super Bowl 100, bulky pads and foam rubber padding might be as outdated as the single-wing formation. Imagine a landscape where bigger, harder and stronger isn’t necessarily key. Rather, gear will become thinner, lighter and more responsive—as well as more obscure.

In fact, let’s begin there, because it is something currently in the works.

The Army Research Lab is located on a secure military base 35 miles north of Baltimore. Here, scientists develop and test the next wave of warfare innovation. One of their ideas involves shear-thickening fluid, a nebulous but exciting innovation. The consistency of the liquid changes depending on the level of stress put on it. If you put the liquid in a tube and pull gently, it stretches like silly putty. If you try jerking it quickly, the tube resists.
Initially, researchers envisioned the product for joints, attempting to insert it into ankle braces or knee braces of soldiers. However they couldn’t figure out an application. Then last year, the NFL and two of its largest corporate sponsors, Under Armour and GE, as well as the National Institute of Standards and Technology, put out an open call to find ways to innovate the game. The “Head and Health Challenge” offered $500,000 grants to proposals they liked, and even more money if the progress continued.
The Army Research Lab entered with a wild idea: What if the shear-thickening fluid was placed in a strap attaching the chin of a helmet to a player’s chest? Would that prevent a player’s head from snapping back and slamming on the ground when he’s tackled?
“If we can control that type of head motion, and reduce the whipping motion when the head hits the ground, we can reduce the acceleration on the head and the brain, and maybe reduce the likelihood of the concussion,” Army researcher Eric Wetzel said last April.
Should their experiment work—at present, it is still years away from development—Wetzel’s team would figure out a way to use the strap for army paratroopers, another population at high risk for back-to-ground concussions.
“It’s a crazy idea,” Wetzel said. “But sometimes those are the best ones.”




Swartz’s area of expertise is making the game safer—he is one of the masterminds behind the helmetless tackling technique—and over the next 50 years, that will carry heavy emphasis.
“In the future, I think that shoulder pads and padding will still do what they are supposed to do, but [they will be] less conspicuous,” he says. “They will be streamlined, and low profile. They will allow the wearer to move as freely as they want without giving up the safety or protection they always had.”


The holy grail of futuristic equipment: lighter, thinner and more flexible, with better protection. That’s what manufacturers are striving for. But the next frontier?
Equipment that is responsive.
Jim Caldwell, the vice president for the Philadelphia-based Unequal Technologies, helped SI brainstorm this idea. Consider that the trend in helmets are sensors that can read the level of impact. Perhaps by 2066, there will be sensors on other pieces of equipment reading other factors, not just hits.
“Maybe there’s something down the pipeline that offers a cooling factor, or a hydration factor,” Caldwell says. There could be a biometric reading embedded into gear that reads what is happening with the body as the game progresses. It could determine if the body is properly hydrated and should it determine it’s not, a cooling mechanism could kick in.
This, undoubtedly, would appeal to a coach like Chip Kelly.
“If you impress oxygen into the body, or force water into the body, you’re talking a game-changer,” Caldwell says. “If I’m an athlete, I have as much energy as I did 15 minutes ago, and I’m replenished.”
On the other end of the spectrum, what if there are chips that send signals to the sidelines? A color or number, perhaps, that flashes when a player must be taken out to the game. “That feels doable,” Caldwell says. “Then again, my goodness, anything is possible, 30, 40, or 50 years from now.”


Who exactly is Ted Wells?

Wells was on athletic scholarship at Holy Cross in 1968. The Washington, D.C., native was one of 20 African-American students who enrolled at the Jesuit college in Worcester, Mass., that fall, after being recruited by a priest who wanted to integrate the predominantly white campus.

The 63-year-old Wells, who declined an interview request, went on to receive his law degree and MBA from Harvard. Now a partner at Paul Weiss, Wells is one of the most successful defense attorneys in the country, with a client list that has included Mike Espy, Scooter Libby, Eliot Spitzer and Robert Torricelli.
"Four times, I've offered him a job," says Bill Bradley, the former New York Knick and U.S. senator. "But he's too good at what he does. He turned me down three times." Wells did say yes to Bradley once, though, taking a spot as treasurer on his 2000 presidential campaign.
Wells, who's been known to lock himself in a hotel room for weeks preparing for a big case, does have sports-related legal experience, having conducted reviews of the NBPA leadership dispute and Syracuse's handing of sexual assault accusations against former assistant basketball coach Bernie Fine.



DURHAM, N.C.—Dismissed from the Duke basketball program in January, Rasheed Sulaimon has been in the national spotlight this week because of allegations that he committed sexual assault, while the school has had to deflect inquiries of an institutional coverup.
Yet SI.com has learned that Sulaimon is not currently under investigation by the school. This was confirmed by Bob Ekstrand, who is serving as Sulaimon’s advisor. A local Durham attorney, Ekstrand reiterated that the former player is not subject to any current legal proceedings and maintains that the allegations are false.
Multiple sources say there was not one specific incident that served as the impetus for Sulaimon's dismissal. Rather it was an accumulation of events that led to that action, including a missed 11 p.m. curfew that occurred shortly before he was kicked off the team.

Krzyzewski and the athletic department have not publicly addressed any specifics regarding the situation, citing federal privacy laws. The university looked into allegations against Sulaimon at some point last year, SI.com has learned.  The alleged victims did not file an official complaint to the school or the local police department. It is unclear if they participated in the investigation.
Sulaimon was notified when an investigation was opened, and then told weeks later that the matter was closed and the university did not have enough information to proceed.
A source tell SI.com that that was the last time Sulaimon had heard from Duke’s Office of Student Conduct in Student Affairs. There is currently no open investigation against Sulaimon, at least to his knowledge. However that should be telling: It is standard procedure for accused students to receive initial notice if an investigation is being opened against them.
The Durham Police Department confirmed that it had no report on Sulaimon.
The 20-year-old was dismissed from the team in January for what Krzyzewski described as a failure to “consistently live up to the standards required to be a member of our program.” Sulaimon is the first player to be dismissed by Krzyzewski in his 35-year tenure as Blue Devils coach. Sulaimon is still enrolled at Duke and in good academic standing.




CARLSBAD, Calif. — Growing up in Del Paso Heights, a hardscrabble neighborhood in northern Sacramento, you develop an aptitude for sniffing out phonies. So imagine 17-year-old football prodigy Shaq Thompson’s skepticism the first time a professional team reached out.
 

 
It had to be a prank. He hadn't played baseball since sixth grade. Thompson’s talents were on the gridiron.
 
A 6-foot-2, 220-pounder with a rare blend of strength and speed, he was the youngest of four brothers to star at Grant Union High. The eldest, Syd'Quan, was drafted by the Denver Broncos in 2010, but would always tell people, “Wait until you see Shaq. He’s better than all of us.” Shaq became the country’s top-rated safety, turning down Oregon and Cal-Berkeley (Syd’Quan’s alma mater) for Washington; he was the Huskies’ most-prized recruit in more than a decade. He’d go on to become an All-America, starring on defense, special teams and even, briefly last fall, at tailback.
 

 

 
Neither party knew it at the time, but that phone call launched what would be the worst career in the history of professional baseball.

* * *
When you first meet Shaq Thompson, you’re immediately struck by his presence. It’s an air of understated confidence, calm and quiet, reminiscent of Earl Thomas.
 
“I’m not a guy that talks a lot,” Thompson says. “When I do, it’s because I have something to say.”
 
He commands a room, even a sprawling warehouse-style weight room blasting Big Sean. There are 31 other prospects training at the EXOS facility in Carlsbad, Calif., Heisman finalist running back Melvin Gordon and massive defensive tackle Danny Shelton, a potential top-10 pick and one of Thompson’s UW teammates, among them. “All these guys are leaders, the big shots at their schools,” says Brent Callaway, a strength coach at EXOS. “But there’s something about Shaq—he has this aura. Everyone gravitates toward him.”
 

 
Or maybe Shaq Thompson is something different altogether. In his freshman year at Washington, coaches created a hybrid safety/linebacker position just to get him on the field. Over the next three years, he played five other positions. His mere presence was a weapon. “We put him at personal protector, not only because he’d be good at it,” says Huskies coach Chris Petersen, “but also, teams would be so worried about us snapping the ball to Shaq that they backed off on trying to block our punts.”
 
That’s the paradox of Shaq Thompson: Nobody knows exactly what he is. They just know they want him.

* * *

 
In the winter of 2012, Amiel Sawdaye, Boston’s director of amateur scouting, posed a challenge to his staff: Find us athletes. It doesn’t matter how unpolished; don’t be afraid to deviate from the typical mold. An intrepid area scout took the task to heart. He found the best athlete in Northern California.
 
The Sox had piqued Shaq’s interest. And they certainly had the attention of Patty Thompson, a single mother of four boys. She saw the temporary nature of football through Syd’Quan, who ruptured his Achilles in the final preseason game before his second season and never played another NFL game. If someone opens a door, Patty said, you should at least peek inside.
 
Thompson played varsity baseball that spring, and the linebacker patrolling the outfield became a spectacle. He barely tallied more hits (18) than strikeouts (17), but crowds buzzed anytime he hurled a ball from right field. One scout noted Thompson could be drafted for his defense alone.
 

 
The Red Sox were sold. They selected Thompson in the 18th round of the 2012 MLB draft.
 
The Sox had done their due diligence, consulting his family to reaffirm interest and contacting then-Washington coach Steve Sarkisian with a five-year plan. Sarkisian is a former baseball player himself, at USC, and three years earlier had encouraged Huskies quarterback Jake Locker to explore something similar. (Locker was drafted by the Los Angeles Angels in 2006 and ’09, but never played professionally).
 
Three months before reporting to Washington for two-a-days, Thompson flew to Fort Myers for rookie ball. The Sox had tempered expectations, and even considered stashing him in batting cages and annexed fields for extra instruction. But the 18-year-old wanted to play, and how do you know if you can hit a 90-mph fastball if you never see one?
 
Thompson saw fastballs—he stared gravely as they whizzed by. He flailed at anything off-speed. He didn’t even put a ball in play until his ninth game. Over a 13-game stretch that would ultimately encompass his entire professional baseball career, he went 0-for-39 with 37 strikeouts. (With due respect, Thompson also drew eight walks.)
 
Deadspin periodically posted about his futility. A national baseball columnist tweeted that he had finally found a professional player with less ability than himself. Some in scouting circles mocked the Sox; Thompson’s raw athleticism was incredible, but you can’t just pluck a kid who doesn’t play and develop him into Major League talent. Said one rival scout: “What were the Red Sox thinking? This isn’t some Disney movie.”

* * *
“We knew there would be a distinct possibility he would struggle,” Sawdaye says. “That was expected. But in the best case scenario, maybe we could catch lightning in a bottle.” The Sox found the criticism to be frustrating and more than a bit hypocritical—as baseball tried to stem the tide of its dwindling popularity, why discourage an 18-year-old star from another sport from putting himself out there?
 

 

 

 
Between his attitude, his work ethic and his personality, he was a favorite within the Red Sox organization. When he left, they had just one goal in regard to Thompson: get him to come back for one more year.
 
Three months after the stint in Fort Myers, Sawdaye tuned into Washington’s game at Berkeley. He watched Thompson make seven tackles, two behind the line of scrimmage. With the Huskies protecting a one-point lead and Cal driving midway through the fourth quarter, Thompson picked off a pass and ran it back 33 yards, setting up a short field for Washington’s clinching touchdown. Sawdaye realized he wasn’t getting his prospect back.

* * *
Baseball’s loss is football’s gain. Seemingly anyone who meets Thompson can’t stop gushing about him. How many 20-year-olds send 5 a.m. text reminders to his coaches about afternoon doctor appointments?
 
In the lead up to the draft he’s hoping to get faster—drop his 40 time to 4.4—improve his footwork, and, just like the baby of any family, make his mother proud. Patty worked for the California tax board until she went on disability three years ago. The family didn't have much (Shaq remembers the electricity turning off in their home on various occasions because of missed bills) but they had a strong core in Patty, who always put a home cooked meal on the table. Shaq calls her almost every night after workouts. “She’s not proud of me yet,” he says. “She’ll only be happy when I get my degree.” A semester shy of graduating, Thompson will resume classes in the spring.
 
His baseball career doesn’t come up often anymore, but despite the hard knocks he knows there was value in the experience. In preparing for the draft, he is among a sea of players who went from ballyhooed high school recruits to pampered college stars. For many, the NFL will be the first time they ever have to face adversity. Thompson has already been to hell and back.
 
“I learned how to accept failure,” he says. “I learned not to be afraid of it, to embrace it, that it’s O.K.”
 
Maybe there’s a Disney movie in there after all.
 

 

[widget widget_name="SI Newsletter Widget”]
 


“But anyway, here it goes,” he says, with an irrepressible smile. “It’s kind of crazy.”


“Alright,” the caller said. “We’ll let you know.”
Click.
A few minutes later, Matthews agent calls. “What are you thinking! Get yourself home, pack up and go. Are you out of your mind?!”
Matthews made the flight.
“Man, I almost messed up, bad,” he says, sheepishly, as he leans into his locker stall on Sunday. Then his grin returns. “And look at this now.”
With two minutes, nine seconds and a sliver of hope remaining in the Seahawks’ season (they trailed 19-14 at that point), Matthews snatched his team’s onside kick on the 50-yard line to extend the game -- and give his story a ridiculous twist.
He is barely alone. As the Seahawks return to their second Super Bowl in as many years, they have become defined by players like Matthews. Guys who were down and out, guys who people forgot about, guys people didn’t believe in. Well, most people.



Gilliam, too, has a story to tell. In 1999, he was seven, living in a rough neighborhood of Harrisburg, Pa. when his mother sent him off to a boarding school more than an hour away. Gilliam didn’t understand it at the time, but the Milton Hershey School was a tuition-free school for low income families, and his single mother was having a hard time taking care of Garry and his younger brother, who had special needs.
Feeling abandoned and confused, Gilliam pored his energy into football and his studies. He earned a scholarship to Penn State, and was awarded six years of eligibility because of an infection he sustained after knee surgery. It was a long rehab back, and when he made it, the coaches switched him from tight end to offensive tackle.

“I had been waiting for that play,” Gilliam said afterward, nearly as breathless and giddy as Matthews. In the locker room Gilliam spent a good amount of time on his phone, checking countless messages from family and friends. Among those who reached out: current students at the Milton Hershey School. Gilliam always encourages them to reach out, hoping he can be a role model.
And who knows, one day they might be Seahawks, too.


***

They went to closed-door board rooms and sat through rubber-chicken banquets. They lobbied the Federal Drug Administration and CEO’s of drug companies. The Frates plead to everyone and anyone who might help, but each venture yielded increasing frustration. Audiences shed tears and wrote checks, but sustaining momentum was a constant struggle.
“There has been no progress made on the war against ALS in the 140 years since it was first discovered,” says Frates, who is now only able to communicate by looking at an on-screen keyboard that tracks the movement of his eyeballs. “The disease was misunderstood, underfunded and was not in the public consciousness as other diseases.”
But for two years, Frates continued to fight. He wouldn’t give up -- he couldn’t give up. Frates always prided himself on his strong hands, the ones that held a firm grip on his bat, the ones that powered base hits through the gap. Though those hands began to tremble, and no longer worked in perfect concert with his eyes or brain, Frates never relented. He mounted a poster of Lou Gehrig’s speech on the wall of his garage. It inspired him every day. I may have had a tough break, but I have an awful lot to live for. The quote became his mantra.
Then, one day last July, Frates posted a 52-second video to Facebook. He challenged friends and a few people in the Boston sports community to try this thing called the “Ice Bucket Challenge.”  It was passed along from Pat Quinn, 31, an ALS patient from New York, who had seen it on Facebook. The challenge started without a specific charity in mind and the mechanics were simple: Dump a bucket of ice over your head, post it to social media, then nominate others to either do the same within 24 hours or make a donation. Frates dared a handful of people to join his fight against ALS.
They did, and millions of others followed. Those who doubted Frates for so long underestimated the collective reach of the sports community in the digital age. About a week later, a cultural phenomenon was sparked, and America was introduced to Pete Frates.
“Our story, the realities of ALS and the journey the patient goes on has now been recognized as unacceptable,” says Frates. “To the whole world.”
​Frates is a 2014 recipient of the Sports Illustration Inspiration Award not only because he became the face of the Ice Bucket Challenge. Rather, the 29-year-old from Massachusetts, like fellow SI Inspiration Award recipient Steve Gleason, persevered for a cause that for so long was neglected by the public at large. There are an estimated 30,000 Americans living with ALS, and patients are given two to five years to live after diagnosis.
“People were simply expected to fade away quietly and die,” says Gleason, a former special-teams ace for the Saints who was diagnosed in 2011. “That was no acceptable to me. That is not OK.”
Though it took a viral campaign for America to fully appreciate the tireless perseverance of Gleason and Frates, those efforts are not forgotten. Gallons upon of ice water just fortified their fight.
We are still a long way from a cure from ALS, but one day we will find it.
“And when that happens,” says former President of the United States Bill Clinton. “All of you who are still around should remember the Ice Bucket Challenge and how we learned to laugh... All of these problems that have beleaguered us, it’s almost like God gave science a human face in its most distant frontiers, deep in our minds hearts and bodies.”
***
At first, Frates’ friends and family took part in the Ice Bucket Challenge. Then it reached Patriots wide receiver Julian Edelman and several members of the Boston Bruins. Soon after, Jeter and Jordan filmed videos. Entire college football teams got sprayed by hoses; LeBron James was doused on a yacht; Roger Goodell in his driveway; Paul Bissonnette, the pro hockey player, had a helicopter dump water on him as he stood on a mountaintop overlooking Lake Widgeon in British Columbia. Even Bill Belichick found reason to shed his beloved hoodie. And then came the non-sports celebrities: the Kennedy family, George Bush, Taylor Swift, Steven Spielberg. Justin Bieber did it twice (once with a shirt, once without). In the age of 140-character tweets, the Ice Bucket Challenge had miraculous staying power. The momentum, finally, seemed unstoppable.
The ALS Association reported more than $100 million in donations from July 29 to Aug 29, a staggering uptick compared to $2.8 million during the same time span in the previous year. In 2013, the ALSA national office received $128,000 in online donations; so far, in ’14, it has reaped $96 million. “To raise this much money in such a short time is absolutely astounding,” says ALSA spokesperson Brian Frederick.
Because the Ice Bucket Challenge was simplistic and fun, some critics slapped it with a “slactivisim” tag. As countless people shared videos of themselves showing off their summer bodies and shrieking at the bone-chilling cold water, it was easy to wonder if they knew exactly why they were participating. For decades, ALS advocates had difficulty raising research money because the rare disease is complex to explain—and because the outlook is so bleak. There are no survivors. When patients are diagnosed, they’re told they likely have two to five years left to live. And they’re not good years.
“People ask what they can do now that the Ice Bucket Challenge is over?” Gleason says. “If the world needs to continue pouring buckets of ice over their heads to wake up to ALS, then keep the ice going. But, another option would be after waking up from the ice bath, to realize the tragedy in the enormous loss of life and learn more about ALS, volunteer to help those living with the disease and encourage giving.”
Gleason, a fan-favorite when he blocked a punt in New Orleans’ first home game following Hurricane Katrina, has only amplified his life mantra, “No White Flags.” He’s skydived; he’s trekked up Machu Picchu with the help of friends; he’s spoken one-on-one with Bill Gates about combatting his disease. He has also privately gathered funds and partnered with neuroscientists, researchers, academics and pharmaceutical companies to help develop one of the most ambitious initiatives in the history of ALS research. He has been a mentor, and also a friend to Frates, their bond as former athletes significant as they search for answers.
A large number of ALS patients are former athletes, and researchers are looking at possible links to the disease and head trauma. A 2012 research study sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that deaths from Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's diseases, when combined, occurred in NFL players at about three times the predicted rate for the general population. “We have learned, in the last three to five years, that there is a connection between football and brain disease, including ALS,” says Gleason. “Its not my opinion, or anyone’s question. It’s a fact. I was unknowingly at higher risk,” Gleason is also mindful of the platform he has been given through football, to become an agent for change.
“Sports have the ability to reach a broad audience on issues outside of the game,” he says. “It’s no surprise to me that the disease is named after a famous baseball player, two ex-athletes started the ice bucket challenge and I’m a former athlete answering questions about ALS in Sports Illustrated.”
***
Two years before America met Pete Frates, his family rallied around his cause. “Team FrateTrain” was an in-house initiative. Frates’ uncle built the website. Another uncle handled finances while an aunt handled public relations. Everyone pitched in as caretakers.
John Frates, Pete’s father, continually jokes that his 15 minutes of fame are long expired. Except America still wants to listen. The fight is bigger than ever.



The team wanted to say thanks to fans for the milestone with an automated tweet by showing their Twitter handles on custom digital Patriots jerseys. They asked fans to retweet the account using the hashtag #1MillionPatriots.

The Patriots quickly deleted that tweet and issued an apology.
We apologize for the regrettable tweet that went out from our account. Our filtering system failed & we will be more vigilant in the future.

